The Project Gutenberg eBook of Historical record of the 71st Regiment
Highland Light Infantry, by Henry J. T. Hildyard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Historical record of the 71st Regiment Highland Light Infantry
       from its formation in 1777, under the title of the 73rd, or
       McLeod's Highlanders, up to the year 1876

Author: Henry J. T. Hildyard

Release Date: February 17, 2023 [eBook #70056]

Language: English

Produced by: Brian Coe, John Campbell and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
             produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
             Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORICAL RECORD OF THE 71ST
REGIMENT HIGHLAND LIGHT INFANTRY ***





  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  A superscript is denoted by ^x or ^{xx}, for example M^cLeod
  or 71^{ST}.

  Footnote anchors are denoted by [number], and the footnotes have
  been placed at the end of the book.

  The tables in this book are best viewed using a monospace font.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.




                          HISTORICAL RECORD

                                OF THE

                71ST REGIMENT HIGHLAND LIGHT INFANTRY,

                FROM ITS FORMATION IN 1777, UNDER THE
                             TITLE OF THE

                   73RD, OR M^cLEOD’S HIGHLANDERS,

                         UP TO THE YEAR 1876.


                             COMPILED BY
                   LIEUTENANT HENRY J. T. HILDYARD,
                            _71st H.L.I._


                               London:
                  HARRISON AND SONS, 59, PALL MALL,
       Booksellers to the Queen and H.R.H. the Prince of Wales.
                                1876.




                               LONDON:
        HARRISON AND SONS, PRINTERS IN ORDINARY TO HER MAJESTY
                          ST. MARTIN’S LANE.




                       SUCCESSION OF COLONELS

                               IN THE

                    71ST HIGHLAND LIGHT INFANTRY.


  1777.  John Lord McLeod.
  1789.  The Hon. Wm. Gordon.
  1803.  Sir John Francis Cradock, G.C.B.
  1809.  Francis Dundas.
  1824.  Sir Gordon Drummond, G.C.B.
  1829.  Sir Colin Halkett, K.C.B.
  1838.  Sir Samuel Ford Wittingham.
  1841.  Sir Thomas Reynell, Bart., K.C.B.
  1848.  Sir Thomas Arbuthnot, K.C.B.
  1849.  Sir James Macdonell, K.C.B. and K.C.H.
  1857.  Sir Thomas Napier, K.C.B.
  1863.  The Hon. Charles Grey.
  1871.  Robert Law, K.H.
  1874.  The Hon. Sir George Cadogan, K.C.B.


The Seventy-first Highland Light Infantry bears the following
honorary records of its varied services on the regimental colour and
appointments:—

  “Hindoostan,” for its distinguished services in India,
    between 1780 and 1797.
  “Cape of Good Hope,” for its part in the capture of
    that colony in 1806.
  “Roleia,”         }
  “Vimiera,”        }
  “Corunna,”        }
  “Fuentes d’onor,” } For its several actions in which it
  “Almaraz,”        }   was engaged in Spain and the
  “Vittoria,”       }   South of France from 1808 to
  “Pyrenees,”       }   1814.
  “Nive,”           }
  “Orthes,”         }
  “Peninsula,”      }
  “Waterloo,” for its share in that battle in 1815.
  “Sevastopol.”
  “Central India.”




                               HISTORY

                               OF THE

                  71^{ST} HIGHLAND LIGHT INFANTRY,

      _Formerly numbered the 73rd Regiment, and called McLeod’s
                            Highlanders._


[Sidenote: 1777.]

Towards the end of the year 1777 every effort was made by the British
Ministry to encourage the country to raise troops voluntarily for the
prosecution of the war then being waged between Great Britain and
her American Colonies. Liverpool, Manchester, Edinburgh, Glasgow,
each raised a regiment of a thousand men at its own expense, and
several independent companies were formed in Wales. In this manner
15,000 men were raised and presented to the State, of which upwards
of two-thirds were obtained from Scotland, and principally from the
Highland clans.

[Sidenote: 1778.]

At this time Lord McLeod, the eldest son of the Earl of Cromarty,
whose title had been attainted and his estates forfeited
for his participation in the Rebellion of 1745, returned to
England from Sweden, having attained in its service the rank of
Lieutenant-General. Being well received by His Majesty King George
II, and finding his influence in the Highlands still considerable,
although destitute of property, he offered his services to raise
a regiment. The offer was accepted, and such was the respect
entertained for his family and name, that in a short time 840
Highlanders were recruited and marched to Elgin. Here they were
joined by 236 Lowlanders, raised by Captains the Honorable John
Lindsay, David Baird, James Fowlis, and other officers, and by 34
English and Irish, who had been recruited in Glasgow. They amounted
in all to 1,100 men, and were embodied at Elgin under the name of
McLeod’s Highlanders in April 1778, where they were inspected by
General Skene, and approved by him as an excellent hardy body of
men, fitted for any service. Immediately after the completion of
this battalion, letters of service were granted for the creation of
a second battalion, which was raised in like manner, with nearly
the same expedition and in equal numbers. There is no record extant
to show the different nationalities of which this battalion was
formed, but it is probable that its composition was very similar
to that of the first battalion when raised. Thus in the course of
a few months Lord McLeod from being an exile without fortune or
British military rank, found himself at the head of upwards of 2,200
of his countrymen, of whom nearly 1,800 were from that district
and neighbourhood in which his family had once possessed so much
influence.

Each battalion consisted of 50 sergeants, 50 corporals, 20 drummers
and fifers, 2 pipers, and 1,000 privates, and was officered as under.

  _Colonel_, John Lord McLeod.

  FIRST BATTALION.

  _Lieut.-Colonel_, Duncan McPherson.

  _Majors._

  John Elphinston.
  James Mackenzie.

  _Captains._

  George Mackenzie.
  Alexander Gilchrist.
  John Shaw.
  Charles Dalrymple.
  Hugh Lamont.
  Hon. James Lindsay.
  David Baird.

  _Captain Lieutenant and Captain_, David Campbell.

  _Lieutenants._

  A. Geddes Mackenzie.
  Hon. John Lindsay.
  Abraham Mackenzie, _Adjt._
  Alexander Mackenzie.
  James Robertson.
  John Hamilton.
  John Hamilton.
  Lewis Urquhart.
  George Ogilvie.
  Innes Munro.
  Simon Mackenzie.
  Philip Melvill.
  John Mackenzie.
  John Borthwick.
  William Gunn.
  William Charles Gorrie.
  Hugh Sibbald.
  David Rainnie.
  Charles Munro.

  _Ensigns._

  James Duncan.
  Simon Mackenzie.
  Alexander Mackenzie.
  John Sinclair.
  George Sutherland.
  James Thrail.
  Hugh Dalrymple.

  _Chaplain_, Colin Mackenzie.
  _Adjutant_, Abraham Mackenzie.
  _Quartermaster_, John Lytrott.
  _Surgeon_, Alexander M‘Dougall.


  SECOND BATTALION.

  _Lieut.-Colonel_, The Hon. George Mackenzie.

  _Majors._

  Hamilton Maxwell.
  Norman McLeod.

  _Captains._

  Hon. Colin Lindsay.
  John McIntosh.
  James Fowlis.
  Robert Sinclair.
  Mackay Hugh Baillie.
  Stair Park Dalrymple.
  David Ross.
  Adam Colt.

  _Lieutenants._

  Norman Maclean.
  John Irving.
  Rod. Mackenzie, _senior_.
  Charles Douglas.
  Angus McIntosh.
  John Fraser.
  Robert Arbuthnot.
  David M‘Cullock.
  Rod. Mackenzie, _junior_.
  Phineas M‘Intosh.
  John Mackenzie, _senior_.
  Alexander Mackenzie.
  Phipps Wharton.
  Laughlan M’Laughlan.
  Kenneth Mackenzie.
  Murdoch Mackenzie.
  George Fraser.
  John Mackenzie, _junior_.
  Martin Eccles Lindsay.
  John Dallas.
  David Ross.
  William Erskine.

  _Ensigns._

  John Fraser.
  John M‘Dougal.
  Hugh Gray.
  John Mackenzie.
  John Forbes.
  Æneas Fraser.
  William Rose.
  Simon Fraser, _Adjt._

  _Chaplain_, Æneas Macleod.
  _Adjutant_, Simon Fraser.
  _Quartermaster_, Charles Clark.
  _Surgeon_, Andrew Cairncross.

The uniform of the regiment was red, with the regular Highland
equipments.

It is worthy of remark that, when first raised, there were no less
than 19 officers in the regiment named Mackenzie. It is probable that
the proportion of non-commissioned officers and privates of that
name was equally large, owing to the fact of the regiment having, as
already stated, been principally raised on the estates of the Earl
of Cromarty, the father of Lord McLeod. These estates are now in the
possession of the present Duchess of Sutherland, who is Countess of
Cromarty in her own right.

[Sidenote: 1st bat.]

[Sidenote: 1780.]

After being embodied at Elgin, the first battalion remained there
some weeks, and then marched to Fort George, where it was formed
into ten companies. It embarked on the 8th of May, 1,100 strong,
under Lord McLeod, for Portsmouth, where it was to be transhipped and
accompany the East India Fleet. The passage, however, having occupied
fifteen days, the fleet sailed before the arrival of the transports,
which were then ordered to proceed to Guernsey and Jersey. Here
the battalion disembarked, and remained until relieved by the
Seventy-eighth Regiment on the 27th November. Embarking on board the
transports which brought the latter, it was conveyed to Portsmouth,
where it disembarked on the 10th December and marched to Petersfield,
where it was quartered until the close of the year. Orders having
been received for its embarkation for the East Indies, a mutiny
occurred in one of the companies, owing to a rumour gaining ground
that the men had been sold to the East India Company by the British
Government. This was happily checked, by the prompt and resolute
spirit displayed by the officers, and the assurance of their Colonel
that this report was entirely groundless. In January the battalion,
about 1,100 strong, embarked on board Indiamen, under the command of
Colonel Lord McLeod. Three vessels formed part of a fleet, escorted
by Rear-Admiral Sir Edward Hughes, which in its passage touched at
Goree, on the Coast of Africa, and captured that settlement from the
French. After leaving Goree the fleet proceeded to the Cape of Good
Hope, at that time in possession of the Dutch, where it landed its
sick. It remained there three months, anchored in Table Bay, and
then continued its course to India. The voyage, though tedious, was
on the whole prosperous, and was brought to a close by anchor being
dropped in Madras Roads on the 20th January, 1780, just twelve months
subsequent to embarkation. The battalion was landed without delay at
Fort St. George, where it remained about a month in barracks, after
which it was removed to Poonamallee.

[Sidenote: 2nd bat.]

[Sidenote: 1778.]

[Sidenote: 1780.]

Before following the proceedings of the first battalion any further,
it will be as well to return to the second battalion, which, as
already mentioned, was embodied in September, 1778. In March of
the following year, this battalion, 1,000 strong, and commanded by
Lieut.-Colonel the Hon. George Mackenzie (brother of Lord McLeod),
embarked at Fort George, and was conveyed to Plymouth. There it
remained encamped upon Maker Heights until the 27th November, when
it embarked for Gibraltar in transports under convoy of Admiral Sir
George Brydges Rodney. In the Bay of Biscay the Spanish Caraccas
Fleet was encountered, and captured, and the Admiral being compelled
to employ a number of the men of his ships of war to man the prizes,
called upon Lieut.-Colonel Mackenzie for the services of the
battalion as Marines. A few days after the men had been distributed
in this manner, the fleet fell in with the Spanish Admiral Don Juan
de Langara, with a fleet consisting of eleven sail of the line,
the whole of whose ships were either taken or dispersed. On the
18th January, 1780, the second battalion disembarked at Gibraltar,
then closely blockaded by the Spaniards, landing at the New Mole
and occupying the Casemates in the King’s Bastion, the marching in
strength being as follows:—

   30 Officers,
    6 Staff ditto,
   22 Drummers,
  944 Rank and file,
   50 Sergeants.

Here it remained during the whole of the siege of that fortress by
the French and Spaniards, sustaining a high character as steady and
trustworthy soldiers.

In the grand sortie in which the Spanish batteries before the
garrison were destroyed, all the grenadier and light infantry
companies in garrison were made up to their establishment previous
to the sortie. The grenadier and light companies in this regiment
consisted of four officers, five sergeants, and 101 rank and file
each. They were stationed with the companies of the Thirty-ninth and
Fifty-sixth Regiments, and a proportion of artillery and engineers,
amounting in all to 668 men, in the centre, or reserve column,
commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Dachenhausen and Major Maxwell. The
orders they received were to march through Bayside barrier, towards
the mortar batteries. The moon shone brightly as the soldiers
assembled on the sands at midnight. Between two and three o’clock
darkness overspread the country, and the troops issued silently from
the fortress. They were challenged and fired upon by the enemy’s
sentries, but the British soldiers rushed forward, overpowered the
Spanish guards, and captured the batteries. The enemy’s soldiers,
instead of defending the works, fled in dismay and communicated the
panic to the troops in their rear. Within an hour the object of the
sortie was effected, trains were laid to the enemy’s magazines, and
the soldiers withdrew. As they entered the fortress, tremendous
explosions shook the ground, and rising columns of smoke, flame, and
burning timber proclaimed the destruction of the enemy’s immense
stores of gunpowder. General Elliot stated in orders:—

“The bearing and conduct of the whole detachment, officers,
seamen and soldiers on this glorious occasion, surpass my utmost
acknowledgements.” The casualties in the three columns of attack were
only 4 killed, 24 wounded, and 1 missing. The grenadier company,
commanded by Captain Sinclair on this occasion, drove the enemy
from their centre guard-house, and the light infantry, commanded by
Captain Dalrymple, obliged them to evacuate Parchal’s battery.

The casualties of the battalion during the three years that the siege
lasted were 1 sergeant, 41 privates killed; 6 officers, 7 sergeants,
and 108 rank and file wounded, and 58 privates died from sickness.
Although application has frequently been made to the authorities, for
permission to have Gibraltar inscribed on the colours, yet for some
inexplicable reason, this has always been refused, though granted to
other regiments that served during the siege with the Seventy-third.

In May, 1783, it embarked on board transports, and sailed for
Portsmouth, where it landed in July, and occupied Hilsea Barracks.
The following month it marched to Stirling, where it was disbanded
on the 3rd October after a service of five years, during the whole
of which period it was commanded by Lieut.-Colonel the Hon. George
Mackenzie.

In 1784 the officers belonging to the late second battalion who were
regimentally senior to those serving with the first were given the
option of joining that battalion in the East Indies at their own
expense, of which some availed themselves.

[Sidenote: 1st bat.]

We shall now return to the first battalion which we left in quarters
at Poonamallee in February, 1780. At the commencement of 1780 a new
war had broken out in India, the causes of which it is not easy to
unravel, owing to the depth to which the several Presidencies of the
East India Company had entered into the intrigues and quarrels of
the Native rulers. On the 5th April, the Mahratta Chiefs, Holkar and
Scindia, were defeated in their camp whilst advancing on Surat, and
this victory was followed by numerous less important successes. In
Bengal, military movements were taking place under the direction of
Sir Eyre Coote, who had now succeeded to the chief command in India,
and the strong fortress of Gwalior, hitherto regarded as impregnable,
was taken by escalade on the 3rd August.

On the side of Madras the forces on the establishment did not exceed
30,000 men, dispersed in very distant quarters, and the Presidency
had unfortunately been engrossed in internal disputes rather than
in active measures of preparation to oppose the enemy. Such was the
state of affairs at Madras when on the 10th of June information
was received that a large army was assembling at Bangalore under
Hyder Ali, the son of a petty chief in Mysore, who had risen to the
chief command of the army of that State. On the death of the Rajah,
Hyder Ali assumed the guardianship of his eldest son, who was left
a minor, placing him under restraint, and seizing upon the reins of
government. Having a considerable territory under his control, he
maintained a formidable military establishment, which he endeavoured
to bring into a high state of discipline and efficiency. Standing
now in the position of Sultan of Mysore, he formed a league with the
French, and entered into a confederacy with the Nizam of the Deccan,
the Mahrattas, and other native powers, for the purpose of expelling
the British from India.

In July, 1780, Hyder Ali, having passed the Ghauts, burst like a
torrent into the Carnatic, whilst his son, Tippoo Saïb, advanced with
a large body of cavalry against the Northern Circars, and even the
villages near Madras were attacked by parties of the enemy’s horse.
In consequence of these events the first battalion Seventy-third
Regiment was ordered to join the army being assembled at St. Thomas’s
Mount under the command of Major-General Sir Hector Munro, K.B. This
army amounted to upwards of 4,000 men, consisting entirely of the
Honourable East India Company’s troops, with the exception of the
Seventy-third Highlanders, then about 800 strong. It was composed as
follows:—

           { Infantry     1,000
  European { Artillery      300
           { Dragoons        30

  Native   { Infantry     3,250
           { Dragoons        30
                          -----
                Total     4,610

Attached to these were 30 field pieces and howitzers, and four
battering 24-pounders.

On the 25th August this corps marched to Conjeveram, about 50 miles
west of Madras on the Arcot road, where it was to be met by a body
of men under Colonel Baillie, from the Gunton Circar, the joint
force proceeding to raise the siege of Arcot, invested by Hyder Ali
on the 21st August. Sir Hector Munro’s army arrived at Conjeveram
on the 29th August, being followed the whole way by the enemy’s
horse. The country here was found to be entirely under water, so
that no provisions of any kind were to be procured, and the force
was consequently dependent upon the four day’s provisions in its
possession.

Hyder Ali now raised the siege of Arcot, and detached Tippoo Saïb
with a force of 40,000 horse and foot and 12 guns to intercept
Colonel Baillie and prevent his junction with the main army. This
junction had been expected to take place on the 30th August, but
Baillie being delayed some days by the sudden rising of a small
river, this time was utilised by the enemy to intercept him.

Colonel Baillie reached Perambaucum, 15 miles from General Munro’s
position, on the 6th September, where he was attacked by Tippoo
Saïb, whom after a contest of several hours he repulsed. Strange
to say, however, the forces of Munro and Baillie, though within a
few hours’ march of each other, made no effort to unite. Two days
after the battle, Colonel Baillie sent notice to General Munro to
push forward with the main body, as, from the loss he had lately
sustained and from want of provisions, he was unable to advance in
the face of an enemy so superior in numbers. After this unaccountable
delay, the General sent forward a detachment under Colonel Fletcher
consisting of the flank companies Seventy-third (now Seventy-first),
two companies of European grenadiers, and 11 companies of Sepoys, in
all 1,000 men. Of the flank companies, Seventy-third, the grenadier
company was commanded by Lieutenant the Hon. John Lindsay, and the
light company by Captain, afterwards General the Right Hon. Sir David
Baird, G.C.B. Colonel Fletcher joined Colonel Baillie’s force on the
9th September.

Reinforced by this detachment, Colonel Baillie set out to join Munro
on the same evening, but had not proceeded beyond a mile when he fell
in with the pickets of Hyder Ali’s army. An irregular fire commenced,
which was kept up by both parties for several miles, until Colonel
Baillie halted about midnight, when he lay on his arms all night
without being disturbed by the enemy.

He continued his march next morning without opposition, and after
proceeding two miles entered a jungle. The Sultan had concentrated
his army about this spot, and on the preceding day had thrown up
three batteries, one in the centre of the grove and one on each
flank. No sooner had Colonel Baillie entered the jungle than a heavy
and destructive fire was opened upon him from 57 pieces of cannon.
The march was continued in the form of a square, with the sick,
baggage, and ammunition in the centre; and though the detachment
was assailed on all sides by an immense force, the enemy after a
desperate conflict of three hours’ duration, was driven back at every
point.

Thus repulsed, Hyder Ali determined to retreat, and orders had been
given to Colonel Lally, a French officer in the service of the
Sultan, to draw off his men, and to the cavalry to cover the retreat,
when two explosions were seen to take place in the British line.
These laid open one entire face of their column, destroyed their
artillery, and threw the whole into irreparable confusion. This
occurrence revived Hyder’s hopes, his cavalry charged in successive
squadrons, and his infantry poured volleys of musketry upon the
devoted band. Reduced at length to little more than 400 men, Colonel
Baillie formed these into a square upon a small eminence. Here, after
two-thirds of the number had been killed or disabled, the officers
with their swords, and the soldiers with their bayonets, repulsed
thirteen charges. At length, borne down by fresh bodies of horse,
Colonel Baillie, to save the lives of the few brave men who survived,
displayed a flag of truce. Quarter was promised, but no sooner had
the men laid down their arms, than they were savagely attacked, and
only by the humane interference of the French officers were any lives
saved.

One of these officers,[1] speaking of this action says:—

  “Too great encomiums cannot be bestowed on the English commander
  and his troops, for in the whole of this trying conflict they
  preserved a coolness of manœuvre which would have done honour to
  any troops in the world. Raked by the fire of an immense artillery,
  the greater part of the action within grape shot range, attacked
  on all sides by not less than 25,000 horse and 30 battalions of
  Sepoys, besides Hyder’s European troops, the English column stood
  firm, and repulsed every charge with great slaughter. The horse
  driven back on the foot, the right of our line began to give way,
  though composed of the best troops in the Mysore army.”

In this action, known by the name of the battle of Perambaucum,
Lieut.-Colonel Fletcher and 29 European officers, with 155 rank and
file were killed; Lieut.-Colonel Baillie with 34 officers, and almost
all the European privates, were wounded; 16 officers and privates
remained unhurt, who, with the rest, were made prisoners. The whole
of the sepoys were either killed, taken, or dispersed.

From the report of an eye-witness, it is stated that the grenadiers
of this regiment under Captain Baird fought with such determination
and heroism, that many of them were seen loading their muskets after
their legs had been shot away; almost all disdained to accept of
quarter.

The flank companies were almost annihilated. Lieut. Geddes Mackenzie
and William Gunn, Volunteer Forbes, 3 sergeants, and 82 rank and file
were killed. Captain Baird received seven wounds, and Lieutenant
the Hon. John Lindsay nine. Lieutenants Philip Melville and Hugh
Cuthbert, 4 sergeants, 4 drummers, and 92 rank and file were also
wounded. All these, with 23 who escaped without wounds, were thrown
into a dungeon by Hyder Ali, where they were treated with such
barbarity that only 30 of the soldiers survived, and of these few
were afterwards fit for service.

Mrs. Grant, in her “Superstitions of the Highlanders,” referring to
this in allusion to the inflexible integrity of the Highlanders under
the most trying circumstances, says of the prisoners:—

  “They were treated with the most cruel indignity, and fed upon
  sparing proportions of unwholesome rice, which operated as a
  slow poison, assisted by the burning heat of the sun by day,
  and the unwholesome dews of night, to which they were purposely
  exposed to shake their constancy. Daily some of their companions
  dropped before their eyes, and daily they were offered liberty
  and riches in exchange for this lingering torture, on condition
  of relinquishing their religion and taking the turban. These
  Highlanders were entirely illiterate, scarce one of them could have
  told the name of any particular sect of Christians, and all the
  idea they had of the Mahommedan religion was that it was adverse to
  their own, and to what they had been taught by their fathers.”

Of the two entire companies but two men rejoined the battalion, and
these were found in the jungle desperately wounded. In consequence of
this, two new flank companies were formed from the battalion by Lord
McLeod.

After Colonel Baillie’s defeat, Sir Hector Munro retired with the
army to Chingleput, being much pressed by the enemy during his march.
The sick and wounded being left there, the army went into quarters on
Choultry Plain for the rainy season, which had now set in.

During the retreat the troops suffered severely from fatigue and
want of provisions. Captain Gilchrist, of the grenadiers, whose ill
health had prevented his being with his company, died, and Lieutenant
Alexander Mackenzie, with a great many privates, was wounded in
skirmishes with the enemy.

[Sidenote: 1781.]

Upon the 17th January the army, being reassembled, took the field
under the command of Lieutenant-General Sir Eyre Coote. At this
time the strength of the regiment did not exceed 500 men, and was
commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel James Craufurd, this officer having
succeeded Lord McLeod, who relinquished his command, and returned to
England, having, it is said, differed in opinion with General Munro
on the subject of his movements. Hyder Ali was in the Tanjore country
committing every species of outrage and devastation.

On the 1st June, 1781, Colonel Lord McLeod received the local rank
of Major-General in the East Indies. In June Sir Eyre Coote moved
his force southwards along the coast towards Cuddalore, where
his outposts were attacked by Tippoo Saïb, who was repulsed. He
afterwards moved to Chillumborem, upon the Coleroon, where the enemy
had a large magazine of grain. The Pagoda was attacked by the pickets
under Major John Shaw, Seventy-third Highlanders, but they were
repulsed and that officer wounded.

Hyder Ali, apprehensive for the safety of Chillumborem, moved
his army in that direction from Tanjore and Trichinopoly, whilst
Lieutenant-General Sir Eyre Coote, with the view of obtaining
supplies from the shipping, proceeded towards Cuddalore. By forced
marches and manœuvres, however, Hyder Ali succeeded in nearly
surrounding the latter on the plains of Porto Novo, about two days’
march south of Cuddalore.

About 4 a.m. on the 1st of July, the enemy, whose force was computed
at 25 battalions of infantry, 400 Europeans, 45,000 horse, and above
100,000 matchlock-men, peons, and polygars, with 47 pieces of cannon,
was seen to draw up in line-of-battle. The British force did not
exceed 8,000 men, of which the Seventy-third was the only European
regiment. Notwithstanding this immense disparity of force, Sir Eyre
Coote determined to attack the enemy, and drew up his army in two
lines, the first, of which the Seventy-third Highlanders formed a
part, being commanded by Major-General Sir Hector Munro, the second
by Major-General James Stuart. A plain divided the two armies, beyond
which the enemy was drawn up on ground strengthened by front and
flanking redoubts and batteries. The action commenced by an advanced
movement of the English troops, and after eight hours’ hard fighting
the enemy was forced from all his intrenchments and compelled to
retire. The Seventy-third was on the right of the first line, and led
all the attacks to the full approbation of the general commanding.
His attention was particularly attracted by one of the pipers, who
always blew up more heartily the heavier the fire became. This so
pleased the general that he cried out “Well done my brave fellow,
you shall have a pair of silver pipes for this!” The promise was
not forgotten, for a handsome pair of pipes was presented to the
regiment, with an appropriate inscription bearing testimony to the
general’s esteem for its conduct and character. Meer Saïb, Hyder
Ali’s favourite general, was mortally wounded in this action, and
amongst the 4,000 killed were many of his principal officers.

The results of this battle enabled Sir Eyre Coote to reach Cuddalore,
his point of destination, on the 4th July, and soon afterwards the
army was moved to St. Thomas’s Mount. On the 3rd August the force
from Bengal under the orders of Colonel Pearse, arrived and formed
a junction with Sir Eyre Coote’s army at Pulicat, to which place
the army had moved to facilitate that object. The British force
now amounted to 12,000 men; the 1st Brigade, composed entirely
of Europeans, was commanded by Colonel Craufurd, Seventy-third
Highlanders, and had its station generally in the centre of the line.
Major-General Sir Hector Munro commanded the right wing, and Colonel
Pearse the left. About this period died Major James Mackenzie,
universally regretted by the regiment. His exertions in the early
part of the campaign had brought on an illness, which terminated his
valuable life.

On the 16th August the preparations which had been actively carried
on for the siege of Arcot and the relief of Vellore being completed,
the army was put in motion. On the 20th Tripassoor was retaken, and
a large supply of grain found there. Hyder Ali’s camp was now at
Conjeveram, and every exertion was made by his detachments to check
the progress of the troops. On the 27th August, the enemy was found
drawn up in order of battle upon the very ground which had witnessed
Colonel Baillie’s defeat, a position which Hyder Ali’s religious
notions induced him to consider fortunate. Here he had determined to
try the issue of a second general action, the result of which will be
best told by the following extract from General Meadows’ despatch:—

  “Hyder thought proper to fall back a few miles to the ground on
  which he had defeated the detachment under Colonel Baillie, where
  he took up a strong position, and, influenced by a superstitious
  notion of its being a lucky spot, had determined, as I was informed
  by my intelligence, to try his fortune in a second battle. I
  accordingly marched on the 27th, in the morning, towards him, and,
  as reported, about 8 o’clock we discovered his army in order of
  battle and in full force to receive us, and in possession of many
  strong and advantageous posts, rendered the more formidable by
  the nature of the country lying between, which was intersected by
  very deep watercourses; in short, nothing could be more formidable
  than the situation of the enemy, and nothing more arduous than our
  approach to present a front to them. I was obliged to form the line
  under a heavy cannonade from several batteries, as well as from the
  enemy’s line, which galled us exceedingly, and was a very trying
  situation for the troops, who bore it with firmness and undaunted
  bravery, which did draw the highest honour and showed a steady
  valour not to be surpassed by the first veterans of any nation in
  Europe. The conflict lasted from nine in the morning till near
  sunset, when we had driven the enemy from all their strong posts,
  and obliged them to retreat with precipitation, leaving us in full
  possession of the field of battle.” The loss of the British was
  upwards of 400 killed and wounded, almost all being native troops.

There was one circumstance peculiar to this field of battle, which
stamped it with aggravated horrors. It is described by Captain Munro
in his narrative as follows:—

  “Perhaps there come not within the wide range of human imagination
  scenes more affecting or circumstances more touching than many of
  our army had that day to witness and to bear. On the very spot
  where they stood lay strewed amongst their feet the relics of their
  dearest fellow-soldiers and friends, who near twelve months before
  had been slain by the hands of those very inhuman monsters that now
  appeared a second time eager to complete the work of blood. One
  poor soldier, with the tear of affection glistening in his eye,
  picked up the decaying spatterdash of his valued brother, with
  the name yet entire upon it, which the tinge of blood and effects
  of weather had kindly spared.... The scattered clothes and wings
  of the flank companies were everywhere perceptible, as also their
  helmets and skulls, both of which bore the marks of many furrowed
  cuts.”

Upon this spot the army halted two days, and it then retired to
Tripassoor, to secure provisions. At this period the health of
Major-General Sir Hector Munro compelled him to leave the army, which
led to Colonel Craufurd becoming second in command, the charge of the
regiment devolving upon Major John Shaw.

On the 27th September, near Sholingar, Colonel Craufurd received the
Commander-in-Chief’s orders to move the British Army to the front.
Hyder Ali, confident of success, made a forward movement to meet
it, when a general action ensued. A detachment commanded by Colonel
Edmonstone, and of which the flank companies Seventy-third formed a
part, succeeded in turning the enemy’s left flank, and falling upon
his camp and rear. The day closed with the total defeat of Hyder
Ali’s troops, who were pursued by the cavalry until sunset.

On the 1st October, under circumstances the most distressing and
unpromising, but with a hope of obtaining provisions, of which the
army was quite destitute, and for which no previous arrangement
had been made by the Government, Sir Eyre Coote pushed boldly
through the Sholingar Pass, and after a march of two days encamped
at Altamancherry, in the Polygar country. Here, by the friendly aid
and kindness of Bum Raze, one of the Polygar princes, the troops
were well supplied with every requisite. The British camp was
moved to Pollipat on the 26th October, and the sick and wounded
sent to Tripassoor. Vellore was also relieved, after which the
army, reinforced by Colonel Laing with 100 Europeans from Vellore,
proceeded to the attack of Chittoor, which, after a gallant
resistance, capitulated. With a view to draw his opponents from
so inaccessible a country, Hyder Ali proceeded to the attack of
Tripassoor, and on the 20th November Sir Eyre Coote retired out of
the Pollamo, through the Naggary Pass, which obliged the enemy to
raise the siege of Tripassoor and retire on Arcot. The campaign
closed with the recapture of Chittoor by the enemy. On the 2nd
December, the monsoon having set in, the army broke up its camp on
the Koilatoor Plain, and the different corps marched into cantonments
in the neighbourhood of Madras.

[Sidenote: 1782.]

At the opening of the succeeding campaign at the beginning of 1782,
the army did not muster a larger force than at the commencement of
the former year. The first and most important object in view was the
relief of Vellore, kept in strict blockade by the enemy. The safety
of this fortress was of paramount consequence, being the only key
possessed by the British to the passes of the Ghauts, through which
an invasion of the enemy’s country could alone be accomplished. The
army pushed through the Sholingar Pass, and by the 11th January
Vellore was relieved and supplied with rice for six months. After
this was effected the army retired, and on the 20th January arrived
at Poonamallee, having lost upon this expedition 6 officers and
about 30 Europeans, with 100 Sepoys killed and wounded.

The following account of the death of John Mackay, a corporal of the
battalion, in a skirmish with the enemy on the march to Vellore, is
given by Captain Munro:—“For the satisfaction of my Highland friends,
I take this opportunity of commemorating the fall of John Mackay,
alias Donn, a corporal in the Seventy-third, son of Robert Donn, the
famous Highland bard, whose singular talent for the beautiful and
extemporaneous composition of Gaelic poetry was held in such esteem
by the Highland Society. This son of the bard has frequently revived
the drooping spirits of his countrymen upon the march by singing in
a pleasant manner the humorous and lively productions of his father.
He was killed by a cannon ball on the 13th of January, and on the
same evening was interred by his disconsolate comrades with all the
honours of war.”

For the first three months of the year 1782 the army of
Lieutenant-General Sir Eyre Coote was retained inactive at St.
Thomas’ Mount, the government of the presidency being apprehensive
for its own safety, whereas a judicious movement on Porto Novo might
have prevented Tippoo Saïb’s junction with the strong reinforcement
of French troops that had arrived from Europe in Admiral Suffrein’s
fleet, or at least averted the loss of Permacoil and Cuddalore. At
length Sir Eyre Coote, having been reinforced by the Seventy-eighth
(afterwards the Seventy-second) Regiment from England, was allowed to
commence operations.

At the beginning of April he marched in a southerly direction by
Corangooly and Wandewash towards the enemy, encamped upon the Red
Hills of Pondicherry. The object of the Commander-in-Chief appeared
to be to separate the French from the Mysore troops, for which
purpose he manœuvred between Chitaput and Arnee, where he had
established magazines. Hyder Ali made a rapid movement, on the 2nd
of June overtaking and attacking the British rear guard, commanded
by Lieutenant-Colonel John Elphinston,[2] Seventy-third Highlanders,
who maintained his ground with great spirit and intrepidity until
the line had completed its formation. The troops were then ordered
to advance immediately upon the enemy’s guns, and the foe was soon
forced across the River Arnee, and in pursuit several tumbrils
were taken by Captain the Honourable James Lindsay. This officer,
perceiving a battalion of the enemy extricating the tumbrils from
the bed of the river, dashed forward at the head of his grenadier
company, supported by the remainder of the corps under Major-General
Mackenzie, and succeeded in dispersing the enemy and seizing the
tumbrils. The conduct of Captain Lindsay, although he had acted
without orders, received the commendation of the Commander-in-Chief.
At the action of Arnee the staff of the regimental colour was
shattered by a cannon ball, and the ensign carrying it was severely
wounded.

The army encamped for the night on the field of battle, and on the
following morning took up a position before Arnee; but a scarcity of
grain compelled the General to retrace his steps towards Madras, and
on the 20th of June he arrived at St. Thomas’s Mount.

In the months of July and August the army made two expeditions, one
to Wandewash, in which it was foiled by the activity of Hyder Ali,
the other for the relief of Vellore, which was more fortunate, as it
succeeded in throwing a large quantity of grain into the fortress.
The siege of Cuddalore being determined on, the army moved on the
26th August in a southerly direction, and on the 4th September halted
on the Red Hills of Pondicherry. Deserters reported the garrison of
Cuddalore to consist of 800 Europeans, 300 Africans, and 600 Sepoys,
who having expelled the inhabitants, and covered the walls with
cannon were resolved to defend the place to the last extremity. The
failure of the supplies which Sir Eyre Coote had been led to expect
from Madras by the fleet, excited so much anxiety and disappointment
in the veteran’s mind, that a severe illness ensued, which obliged
him to quit the army. The command devolved upon Major-General James
Stuart, who commenced his retreat on the evening of the 10th October.
On the 15th October, the monsoon set in with unusual severity, and
the army went into cantonments in the vicinity of Madras. Hyder Ali
at the same time resumed his old position near Arcot. Shortly after
this, Rear-Admiral Sir Richard Bickerton, with a large fleet from
England, arrived in Madras Roads. Considerable reinforcements were
on board, consisting of the Twenty-third Light Dragoons, One hundred
and first and One hundred and second Regiments, and the Fifteenth
Regiment of Hanoverian Infantry, which joined the army in its
cantonments.

[Sidenote: 1783.]

In December occurred the death of Hyder Ali, who was, however,
succeeded without commotion by his son Tippoo Saïb, to whom he
left a kingdom of his own acquisition, which made him one of the
most powerful princes in India. Notwithstanding that by private
information overland news was received of a peace having been
concluded between England and the other belligerent powers in Europe,
still the Madras Government determined to persevere in its original
plans for the attack of Cuddalore. With this view Major-General
Stuart put his army in motion on the 21st April, marching by brigades
in a southerly direction. It consisted of the Seventy-third and
Seventy-eighth, and One hundred and first regiments, a considerable
body of native troops, and a detachment of Hanoverians under Colonel
Wangenheim. Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel Elphinston, Seventy-third
Highlanders, took the lead with the Fifth brigade, to the command of
which he had been appointed, in consideration of his distinguished
conduct and important services in the field. Lieut.-Colonel James
Stuart, Seventy-eighth Highlanders, commanded the First or European
Brigade, of which the Seventy-third formed a part, and which amounted
to 1,600 men. Colonel Elphinston in his advance possessed himself of
the Permacoil ruins, from whence the enemy’s advanced parties could
be plainly seen upon the Red Hills. The remainder of the army joined
him there on the 2nd May. About this time accounts were received of
the death of Lieut.-General Sir Eyre Coote, and Major-General Stuart
temporarily succeeded to the command of the forces in India.

After leaving Permacoil, the army advanced to Killinoor, and from
thence towards the Red Hills. On the 4th June, Major-General Stuart
encamped close to the Pannar river, about five miles west of
Cuddalore, behind which the French army was descried in an intrenched
camp. The British passed the Pannar river on the 6th June without
opposition, passed the Bandipollam Hills, and took up a strong
position not more than two miles from the south face of the fortress
of Cuddalore, having the right flank covered by the sea and the left
by the Bandipollam Hills. The enemy, commanded by General de Bussy,
had in the meantime thrown up works along his front. On the 12th June
Major-General Stuart determined to attack General de Bussy in the
position he occupied, and issued preparatory orders accordingly. At
4 o’clock on the morning of the 13th June the action commenced by
a movement from the British left against the enemy’s right flank.
A very obstinate and sanguinary contest ensued, continuing without
intermission until the evening, when, both armies remaining upon
the field of battle, each claimed the victory. In this action
the Seventy-third Highlanders highly distinguished itself, having
wrested from the enemy in the course of the conflict seven different
redoubts. The loss it sustained was very severe, amounting in killed
and wounded to 13 officers and 272 men, being one-half of the number
in the field. The regiment was commanded by Captain Hugh Lamont.
Captain the Honourable James Lindsay, commanding the Grenadier
Company, Captain Alexander McKenzie, Lieuts. Simon Mackenzie and
James Trail, 4 sergeants and 80 rank and file were killed. Captain
John Hamilton, Lieuts. Charles Gorrie, David Rannie, John Sinclair,
James Duncan, and George Sutherland, 5 sergeants and 107 rank and
file were wounded. The enemy’s loss was estimated at 62 officers, 961
men killed, wounded, and missing.

The following flattering compliment formed part of the General Orders
issued by the Commander-in-Chief at the conclusion of the action:—

  “I am also grateful to Captain Lamont and the officers under
  his command who gallantly led the _precious remains_ of the
  Seventy-third Highlanders through the most perilous road to glory,
  until exactly one-half of the officers and men were either killed
  or wounded.”

The British prosecuted the siege of Cuddalore with vigour, and on the
25th June the first parallel was completed. On that day the enemy
made a sortie, but was repulsed with considerable loss after a severe
contest. The commander of the party, Colonel le Chevalier de Damas,
was among the prisoners taken. On the 1st July a frigate arrived in
Cuddalore Roads, bringing official accounts from England of a general
peace having been concluded, and hostilities consequently ceased.

[Sidenote: 1784.]

By the 2nd August the British army had received the supplies, of
which it stood greatly in want, and the camp was broken up, the
troops marching to St. Thomas’s Mount where they arrived on the
16th August. Shortly afterwards, the army went into winter quarters,
the Seventy-third occupying the fort and cantonment of Arcot. On
the conclusion of the peace, in March, 1784, Captains Baird and
the Honble. John Lindsay, Lieut. Melville and about 30 men, who
were taken in Colonel Baillie’s affair, were released and rejoined
the regiment. During the remainder of the year the Seventy-third
continued at Arcot, and was only employed, beyond the usual routine
of duty in quarters, for a short time in quelling a mutiny which
broke out in the native cavalry at Arnee. The regiment at this period
was commanded by Lieut.-Colonel William Dalrymple. In the course
of the month of June it was removed from Arcot to Fort St. George,
where it was joined by several officers of the late second battalion,
which had been disbanded. Lieut.-Colonel Dalrymple having returned to
England, Lieut.-Colonel the Honble. George Mackenzie took command of
the regiment, which continued in quarters at Madras for the remainder
of the year.[3]

At the commencement of the year 1786, the numerical title of the
regiment was changed to the Seventy-first Highlanders, and new
colours were received from England bearing that number, which
designation it has since retained. In March quarters were changed to
Wallajahabad and Chingleput, nine companies being cantoned at the
former and one at the latter under Brevet Lieut.-Colonel Hamilton
Maxwell.

On the 4th June, 1787, Colonel the Honble. George Mackenzie,
commanding the regiment, died after a short illness and was interred
at Madras. He was succeeded in the command by the senior major,
Brevet Lieut.-Colonel John Elphinston, who was succeeded in the
majority by Captain David Baird.

During the year 1787 no change of quarters took place.

[Sidenote: 1788.]

In February, 1788, in consequence of some disturbance or alarm in
the Bombay presidency, the Seventy-first, about 800 strong, marched
to Madras, and immediately embarked on board the Company’s ships for
Bombay, where it arrived in April after a favourable passage. It
remained here only six months, when, its services being dispensed
with, it returned to Madras, and arrived there in December. Five
companies under Lieut.-Colonel Elphinston occupied the barracks
in Fort St. George, and the other five companies proceeded to
Poonamallee. Major-General the Honble. William Gordon was appointed
Colonel on the 9th April, 1789, in succession to Major-General John
Lord McLeod deceased. In the course of the year the five companies at
Poonamallee were moved to Tripassoor.

[Sidenote: 1790.]

Early in 1790, hostilities having commenced by Tippoo Sultan
attacking and capturing the lines of Travancore, the British
Government in India determined to support the Rajah of that country.
On the 18th of March an encampment was formed for that purpose
in the neighbourhood of Conjeveram under the command of Colonel
Musgrave. The force assembled there consisted of the Nineteenth
British Dragoons, the Fifty-second and Seventy-first Highlanders, the
Third and Fourth Regiments of native Cavalry, the first Battalion of
Coast Artillery, and five of Coast Infantry. On the 29th of March
this force moved to Trichinopoly, where Colonel Musgrave effected a
junction on the 29th April, with the division assembled there under
Colonel Brydges. This comprised the Thirty-sixth and Seventy-second
Regiments, the Second and Fifth Native Cavalry, and seven battalions
of Coast Sepoys.

On the 24th of May General Meadows arrived at Trichinopoly, and
assumed the command: the army consisted of 15,000 men, forming
two European and four native brigades. These were divided into
wings. Lieut.-Colonel James Stuart, Seventy-second Highlanders,
being appointed to command the left wing, and Colonel Brydges of
the East India Company’s Service, the right; the Seventy-first and
Seventy-second Highlanders, and First East India Company’s European
battalion, formed the Second European brigade, under Lieut.-Colonel
Clarke of the Company’s Service. The whole of the cavalry in the
advance was commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Sir John Floyd of the
Nineteenth Light Dragoons.

On the 24th May, Major-General (afterwards Sir William) Meadows
reviewed the army, which on the 26th was moved towards the Coimbatore
country by Anatore and Kidnaveran. On the 15th June the army reached
the fortified post of Caroor, which the enemy abandoned without
opposition. Here it remained strengthening the place and collecting
grain till the 2nd July, when it moved to Arrivacourchy, where it
arrived on the 5th, and, continuing its march by Tooramboddy, reached
Daraporam on the 10th July, where a large supply of grain was found.
The army arrived at Coimbatore on the 22nd July, being harassed on
the march by Tippoo Saïb’s irregular horse. A halt was made here,
and detachments sent to reduce Dindigul, Errode, and Palghautcherry,
upon which service the flank companies of the Seventy-first were
employed under Captains Phineas M^cIntosh and James Robertson. In
August the whole of the cavalry and the advanced infantry had been
pushed forward to the Boovany, near to the Gudzelhetty Pass. Tippoo
Saïb, profiting by the divided state of the British force, descended
with his whole army, and, after a very severe conflict, obliged
Lieut.-Colonel Floyd to fall back. The troops from Coimbatore,
however, had marched to his support, and, on the junction being
effected, Tippoo Saïb retired. The British returned to Coimbatore
on the 23rd September. Upon the march of the main body, the flank
companies of the Seventy-first and Seventy-second were withdrawn from
the siege of Palghautcherry, and ordered to take post in the fort
of Coimbatore: and on the return of the army they rejoined their
regiments.

The army was again put in motion on the 29th September, proceeding
towards the Boovany by Shawoor and Coopachittypollum, where the
troops arrived a few hours after Tippoo Saïb had left it. Some
elephants, bullocks, and camels, loaded with rockets, fell into the
hands of the British. On the 4th of October the army arrived at
Errode, the enemy keeping a respectful distance during the march, and
on the 6th it was ascertained that he had arrived with his entire
force at Darraporam, against which he opened his batteries on the
8th. The fort had no cannon mounted, and the garrison, consisting
of 100 Europeans and 200 Sepoys, capitulated on honourable terms,
which were strictly adhered to. The British army moved on the 5th
October, and on the 15th encamped in the neighbourhood of Coimbatore,
where Lieut.-Colonel Stuart joined from Palghautcherry, after having
taken that place, and left it in a tolerable state of defence. On
the 20th October, all the heavy baggage having been deposited in the
fort of Coimbatore, the army marched towards Errode, by Avinochy and
Perentore, where it arrived on the 2nd November. On the 8th the army
proceeded in the direction of Bovancore, and thence to a ford about
three miles below Errode, the whole crossing the Cavery on the 9th
and 10th, while Tippoo Saïb moved his entire force against a division
under the orders of Lieut.-Colonel Maxwell, Seventy-fourth Regiment,
then in the Bharamahl country. On the 11th November the army moved
by Saukerrydroog on the Tappoor Pass, and ascended on the 14th,
encamping at Adomancettah in the Bharamahl country: it marched again
on the 15th, and effected its junction with Lieut.-Colonel Maxwell
at Darampoury on the 17th. The whole force was now divided into ten
brigades. The Seventy-fourth Highlanders joined the Seventy-first
and Seventy-second in the Second Brigade; and Lieut.-Colonel Maxwell
assumed command of the left wing in place of Colonel Brydges, who was
appointed to command at Trichinopoly.

[Sidenote: 1791.]

It was now ascertained that the enemy, whose movements were always
sudden, varied, and perplexing, was directing his course to the
Carnatic by Namacul and Trichinopoly. The British, in consequence,
pursued by Malusundrum, arriving on the 23rd at Vavoor, the 27th at
Jaloor, the 6th December at Munsarapett, at Terany on the last day
of the year, and the 12th January, 1791, at Arnee. During this long
and fatiguing march, the Anglo-Indian troops frequently encamped upon
the ground from which the enemy had removed in the morning, but the
efforts made to overtake him were unsuccessful. The heavy guns and
the sick having been left in the fort of Arnee, the army proceeded to
Velhout, where on the 29th January it was reviewed by General Charles
the Earl Cornwallis, K.G., who had arrived from Bengal to assume
command, and who expressed great satisfaction at the appearance of
the troops. His Lordship was at this period Governor-General and
Commander-in-Chief in the East Indies. In the course of the foregoing
campaign the Seventy-first lost few men in action, but many fell
victims to climate and fatigue.

The army, being refreshed and equipped, commenced moving in a
westerly direction on the 5th February, and passing by Perambaukum
and Sholingar, arrived on the 11th in the vicinity of Vellore. On
the 14th it marched by Chittipet and Chittoor towards the Muglee
Pass, which it reached on the 17th. The following day the advance,
followed by the park and stores, ascended the Ghauts, the whole
army encamping on the 19th at Palamnaire, in the Mysore country,
without having seen anything of the enemy. During the time the
British army remained at Velhout Tippoo Saïb pushed southward
and summoned Cuddalore, but upon hearing in what direction Earl
Cornwallis had moved the Sultan hastened to the Shangana Pass, where
he arrived too late to oppose the troops at the Muglee Pass. On the
24th the British marched to Colar, which was abandoned on their
approach, and the army moved on to Ouscotta, which was carried by
a battalion of sepoys. The enemy displayed a part of his force on
the 4th March, and on the following day opened a cannonade upon the
troops moving towards Bangalore, whilst his horse attempted to seize
the stores and baggage, but without success. About sunset on the
5th March the army encamped within shot of the fort of Bangalore.
The day following the suburbs of the town were attacked by the
Thirty-sixth and Seventy-sixth Regiments, with some battalions of
sepoys, and carried after a very resolute resistance on the part of
the defenders. From this period to the 14th March nothing material
occurred, but every preparation for the approaching siege was
carried on with diligence and activity. On the 15th, the batteries
being completed, opened fire upon Bangalore, and on the 17th the
lines were cannonaded by the enemy, while at night the camp was
much disturbed by his rockets. Forage became very scarce, and none
could be procured beyond the advanced pickets. The siege, however,
proceeded, the enemy continuing to harass the besiegers until the
21st March, when the breach being considered practicable, an attack
was ordered. The storming party consisted of the grenadiers of the
European regiments, followed by their light companies, and led by
Lieutenant James Duncan, Seventy-first Highlanders, and Lieutenant
John Evans, Fifty-second Regiment, with a forlorn hope of thirty
chosen men, the whole supported by the battalion companies of the
Thirty-sixth, Seventy-second, and Seventy-sixth Regiments, with some
battalions of Bengal sepoys. The attacking force was commanded by
Lieut.-Colonel Maxwell, Seventy-fourth Highlanders, the flankers
by Major Kelly; Major-General Meadows was present on the occasion.
The grenadier company, Seventy-first Highlanders, was commanded by
Captain the Honourable John Lindsay, who, upon entering the breach,
directed his men to throw away their priming and trust entirely to
their bayonets. The light company was commanded by Captain James
Robertson, son of the celebrated historian. With the aid of scaling
ladders, and after encountering very formidable obstacles, Bangalore
was carried. From the 6th March to the capture of Bangalore the
Seventy-first had 6 privates killed and 14 wounded. On the 28th
March, a strong garrison being left in Bangalore, the army moved
to Deonhully, the birthplace of Hyder Ali, where it arrived on the
30th, and on the 1st April at Chinnaballaporam, both of which places
were abandoned by the enemy. The army reached Connapelly on the 12th
April, and on the following day effected a junction with the Nizam’s
force, which had been sent to co-operate with the British, and which
amounted to about 15,000 cavalry. On the 18th April the army arrived
at Venkatagherry, where a large detachment of Europeans, under
Colonel Oldham, joined from the Carnatic, and on the 22nd April it
again encamped near Bangalore. During this march, the object of which
was chiefly to secure supplies, the enemy’s irregular horse were
now and then seen in small detached bodies. On the 4th May the army
marched towards Seringapatam, the capital of Tippoo Saïb’s territory,
and on the 13th reached Arakerry, on the Cavery, about eight miles
below Seringapatam. The enemy could be seen in front, with their
right resting on the river, and their left on a high hill named the
Carighaut. During the night of the 14th of May the troops marched
with a view to surprising the enemy, but owing to the badness of the
weather and roads, together with the jaded state of the gun bullocks,
little or no progress was made during the night, but on the following
day, after undergoing great fatigue, they were brought into action.
The enemy was then soon driven from his strong position, and forced
across the river to the island upon which the capital, Seringapatam,
is situated, where he was protected by his batteries. In this affair
four guns and several standards were taken. The Seventy-first lost
Lieutenant and Adjutant Roderick Mackenzie and 7 rank and file
killed. Ensign John Stuart and 74 rank and file were wounded. The
army rested upon the field of battle, and moving again on the 18th
arrived at Canambaddy, on the Cavery, upon the 20th. It was now
ascertained that the season was too far advanced for undertaking
immediately the siege of Tippoo Saïb’s capital, and it was determined
accordingly to withdraw. The battering train was destroyed, all the
ammunition stores which could not be removed were buried, and on
the 26th May the army marched in the direction of Bangalore. In the
course of this retreat the British were joined by the Mahratta army,
consisting of about 33,000 men, chiefly cavalry, and 30 pieces of
cannon. Of the approach of this large force the British had been kept
in total ignorance by the activity of Tippoo’s irregular troops.
Captain Little, with two battalions of Bombay sepoys, joined with the
Mahratta army, and supplies were now abundant.

On the 11th July the army arrived at Bangalore without any attempt
on the part of the enemy to interrupt the march. By this time the
Nizam’s cavalry had become unfit to keep the field, and were allowed
to return to their own country. A large detachment of the Mahrattas
proceeded into the Sera country, the remainder continuing with the
British army. On the 15th July the sick and half of the tumbrils
belonging to the field pieces were sent into the fort of Bangalore,
and the army moved towards Oussoor, where it arrived on the 11th of
the following month. The fort of Oussoor was abandoned by the enemy
after he had blown up the angles.

On the 12th of August the army moved from Oussoor, and on the 23rd
arrived at Bayeur. About this period Major Gowdie, of the Honourable
East India Company’s Service, was detached with some troops for the
reduction of the strong hill fort of Nundydroog, which it was found
required regular approaches. The flank companies of the Thirty-sixth
and Seventy-first Regiments, under the command of Captain Robertson
of the latter corps, marched on the 17th of October to join the
detachment under Major Gowdie, and, upon their arrival, were
immediately placed in the last parallel.

On the 18th of October General the Earl Cornwallis with the whole
army, made a movement towards Nundydroog, and in the evening of that
day the troops were told off for an assault upon the two breaches,
which had been pronounced practicable. The attacks commenced at
eleven o’clock at night, the grenadiers assaulting the right
breach and the light companies the left. The forlorn hope of the
right attack consisted of twenty grenadiers, volunteers from the
Thirty-sixth and Seventy-first, led by Lieutenant Hugh Mackenzie
of the Seventy-first, afterwards for a long time paymaster of the
regiment. The same number of light infantry, headed by Lieutenant
Lewis Moore, of the Seventy-first, formed the left attack. The
grenadier company of the regiment, in support, was commanded by
Lieutenant James Duncan, the light company by Lieutenant Kenneth
Mackenzie, the whole under Captain Robertson’s orders. Captain
Robert Burne supported, with the Thirty-sixth grenadiers, the right
attack, and Captain William Hartley, with the light company of that
regiment, the left attack; Major-General Meadows, as usual, animating
the whole with his presence. Both breaches were carried without much
resistance from the enemy, and the gateway of the inner wall being
soon secured, the fort fell into the possession of the British. Many
of the enemy were killed, and several, in attempting to escape, were
dashed to pieces over the precipices. It was an additional source of
gratification that this important service had been achieved without
the loss of a British soldier. The following general order was issued
on this occasion:—

                            “_Head-Quarters Camp, October 20th, 1791._

  “Lord Cornwallis having been witness of the extraordinary
  obstacles, both of nature and art, which were opposed to the
  detachment of the army that attacked Nundydroog, he cannot too
  highly applaud the firmness and exertions which were manifested by
  all ranks in carrying on the operations of the siege, or the valour
  and discipline which were displayed by the flank companies of His
  Majesty’s Thirty-sixth and Seventy-first Regiments (other regiments
  of native infantry were here enumerated) that were employed in the
  assault last night, and which, by overcoming all difficulties,
  effected the reduction of that important fort, and he particularly
  desires that his warmest thanks may be presented to Captain
  Robertson of the Seventy-first Regiment, who commanded the flank
  companies that led the assaults.”

In a few days subsequently to the fall of Nundydroog the army
retraced its route to Bangalore. On the 4th of December the troops
were again put in movement, directing their march towards Savendroog,
a fortress situated on the side of a mountain surrounded by almost
inaccessible rocks. The fort being reconnoitred, a detachment, under
Lieut.-Colonel James Stuart of the Seventy-second Regiment, was
selected and ordered to reduce the place. On the 17th the British
were enabled to open upon the fort a battery of six 18-pounders and
three 12-pounders with considerable effect. The flank companies of
the Seventy-first and Seventy-sixth Regiments joined the detachment
under Lieut.-Colonel Stuart on the 20th of December, and on the
following day the flank companies of the Fifty-second, Seventy-first,
Seventy-second, and Seventy-sixth were selected for the attack upon
Savendroog, in which a practicable breach had been effected, and
formed under Lieut.-Colonel Colebrook Nesbitt, of the Fifty-second
Regiment. The storming party, commanded by Lieut.-Colonel Nesbitt,
was directed to four different attacks: Captain James Gage, with
the grenadiers of the Fifty-second and flank companies of the
Seventy-sixth Regiments, to gain the eastern hill to the left;
Captain the Hon. John Lindsay and Captain James Robertson, with
the flank companies of the Seventy-first, to separate and attack
the works or parties they might discover in the chasm or hollow
between the hills; the Fifty-second and Seventy-second Regiments
were to follow the flank companies. Parties were detached under
Lieut.-Colonel Baird and Major Petrie round the mountain to draw the
attention of the enemy from the main object, and to endeavour to
prevent his escape. At eleven o’clock in the morning of the 21st of
December, on a signal of two guns being fired from the batteries, the
flank companies, in the order described, followed by the Fifty-second
and Seventy-second Regiments, advanced to the assaults, the band of
the Fifty-second playing “Britons, strike home,” while the grenadiers
and light infantry mounted the breach. Immediate success followed
the attempt, the fort being carried without the loss of a man. The
troops were thanked in general orders for their gallant conduct, as
follows:—

  “Lord Cornwallis thinks himself fortunate, almost beyond example,
  in having acquired by assault a fortress of so much strength and
  reputation, and of such inestimable value to the public interest
  as Savendroog, without having to regret the loss of a single
  soldier.... Although the resistance was so contemptible, he is not
  the less sensible that the behaviour of the grenadiers and light
  infantry of the Fifty-second, Seventy-first, Seventy-second, and
  Seventy-sixth Regiments, who led the assaults, and who must have
  made the decisive impression upon the minds of the enemy, reflects
  the most distinguished honour upon their discipline and valour.”

[Sidenote: 1792.]

Outredroog, Ram Gurry, and Sheria Gurry shortly afterwards
surrendered to the British Army. The force subsequently moved towards
Outredroog, a hill fort about thirty miles west of Bangalore, where a
general hospital was established. On the 31st of January, 1792, the
army, under General the Earl Cornwallis, was reviewed by the Poonah
and Hyderabad Chiefs, and on the following day commenced its march
towards Seringapatam, passing by Hooleadroog, Tagilly, and Carrycode.
The troops came in sight of Tippoo’s capital on the 3rd of February,
and encamped at the French Rocks. The enemy’s horse showed itself on
the 4th and 5th, but attempted nothing hostile.

The entrenched camp of Tippoo Saïb was reconnoitred on the 6th
of February, and at dark the army was formed in three columns of
attack. The right, under Major-General Meadows, consisting of the
Thirty-sixth and Seventy-sixth King’s Regiments; the centre, under
the Commander-in-Chief, General the Earl Cornwallis, consisting of
the Fifty-second, Seventy-first, and Seventy-fourth King’s Regiments.
The left, under Lieut.-Colonel Maxwell, of the Seventy-fourth, was
composed of the Seventy-second Regiment. The native troops were
divided among the three columns. By eight o’clock in the evening
of the 6th of February, the three columns were in motion. The head
of the centre column, led by the flank companies of the respective
corps, after twice crossing the Sohany river, which covered the
enemy’s right wing and front, came in contact with his first line,
and immediately forced its way through it. The British flankers,
mixing with the fugitives, crossed the north branch of the Cavery,
at the foot of the glacis of the fort of Seringapatam. Captain the
Honourable John Lindsay collected the grenadiers of the Seventy-first
upon the glacis, and attempted to push into the body of the place,
but was prevented by the bridge being raised a few moments before he
reached it. He was soon after joined by some of the light company of
the Fifty-second and grenadiers of the Seventy-sixth, with whom he
forced his way down to the famous “Lal bagh,” or Ruby Garden, where
he was attacked most furiously, but the enemy was repelled with the
bayonet.

Captain Lindsay was afterwards joined by the Seventy-fourth
grenadiers, and attempted to drive the enemy from the Pettah, but
could not succeed, from the numbers which poured on him from all
sides. This gallant officer then took post in a redoubt, where
he maintained himself until morning, and then moved to the north
bank of the river, where the firing appeared very heavy. He was
there met by Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel the Honourable John Knox,
of the Thirty-sixth Regiment, and by Lieut.-Colonel Baird, with
the grenadiers of the Fifty-second and the light company of the
Seventy-first, together with some of the troops that composed the
left attack.

During these occurrences the battalion companies of the Fifty-second,
Seventy-first, and Seventy-second Regiments forced their way across
the river to the island, overpowering all that opposed them, when
Captain Archdeacon, commanding a battalion of Bengal sepoys, being
killed, that battalion was thrown into confusion, falling back upon
the Seventy-first. Major Stair Park Dalrymple, wishing to prevent
the sepoys intermingling with his men, ordered the regiment to move
obliquely to the left, an operation that by chance brought him in
contact with the Sultan’s redoubt, which was instantly attacked
and carried. The charge of the redoubt was given to Captain Hugh
Sibbald, of the Seventy-first, with his company, who on the following
morning was killed, nobly defending it against repeated and desperate
attacks from the enemy. He was replaced by Major Shelly, under whom
the redoubt sustained two serious assaults. The Commander-in-Chief,
General the Earl Cornwallis, in compliment to the memory of this
officer, had the name of the redoubt changed to “Sibbald.”

In the evening of the 7th of February 3,000 of the enemy’s horse
attacked the British troops on the island, but were repulsed by the
Seventy-first Regiment and the First Coast Sepoys. In the course of
these operations the regiment had Captain Sibbald and Lieutenant
Daniel Bayne killed; Ensign Duncan Mackenzie was wounded; about 100
rank and file were killed and wounded.

The enemy’s loss was very severe, being estimated at 20,000 _hors
de combat_. Eighty pieces of cannon were taken by the British. The
following general order was issued:—

  “Feb. 7th.

  “The conduct and valour of the officers and soldiers of this army
  have often merited Lord Cornwallis’s encomiums, but the zeal and
  gallantry which were so successfully displayed last night in the
  attacks of the enemy’s whole army in a position which had cost
  him so much time and labour to fortify, can never be sufficiently
  praised; and his satisfaction on an occasion which promised to be
  attended with the most substantial advantages has been greatly
  heightened by learning from the Commanding officers of divisions
  that this meritorious behaviour was universal through all ranks, to
  a degree that has been rarely equalled. Lord Cornwallis therefore
  requests that the army in general will accept of his most cordial
  thanks for the noble and gallant manner in which they have executed
  the plan of the attack; it covers them with honour, and will ever
  command his warmest sentiments of admiration.”

On the 9th of February the army took up its final position for
the siege of Seringapatam, and on the 15th Major-General Robert
Abercromby joined with the Bombay force, consisting of the
Seventy-third, Seventy-fifth, and Seventy-seventh regiments, besides
native troops, making a total of about 6,000 men.

The Seventy-first Highlanders, commanded by Major Dalrymple, crossed
the south branch of the Cavery at nine o’clock at night on the 18th
of February, and two hours later attacked by surprise a camp of the
enemy’s cavalry, of whom a great part were slain and the remainder
dispersed in all directions. This movement was designed to cover
the operation of opening the trenches, which took place at the same
time within 800 yards of the fort. Until the 24th of February the
approaches were carried on with the greatest activity, when the
general orders announced that the preliminary articles of peace had
been signed, and in consequence all hostile measures immediately
ceased.

On the 26th of February the two sons of Tippoo Saïb, Abd-el-Khalik
and Musa-ed-Deen, the former ten years of age and the latter eight,
were brought to the British camp as hostages for the due performance
of the preliminary articles.

In consequence of some obstacles which had been opposed by Tippoo
to the arrangement of the definitive treaty, working parties were
ordered, and the guns replaced in the batteries on the 10th March.
This state of suspicion and preparation lasted until the 15th of
March, when it was discontinued, and on the 18th of that month, the
definitive treaty being duly executed and signed, was delivered by
the young Abd-el-Khalik to each of the confederates. On the 20th the
counterpart was sent to Tippoo Saïb.

Thus terminated a war in which the confederates wrested from the
enemy 70 fortresses, 800 pieces of cannon, and destroyed or dispersed
at least 50,000 men. By the articles of the treaty Tippoo Saïb
was bound to pay a large sum of money and to cede one-half of his
dominions. The Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief in India
granted from this money a sum equal to six months’ batta for all
ranks, and the Court of Directors afterwards made a similar grant.
The East India Company also granted an annuity of £50 to Captain P.
Melville for his services in India.

On the 26th of March, the exchange of the definitive treaty being
completed, the British commenced moving towards Bangalore, from
whence they proceeded to the Pednaigdurgum Pass, where the Bengal
troops were ordered to their own Presidency.

Early in May the army descended the Ghauts, arriving soon after at
Vellore, where the Commander-in-Chief arranged the cantonments of the
troops and proceeded to Madras. The Seventy-first received orders to
march to the southward, and in the month of June arrived at Warriore,
near Trichinopoly, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Baird, who
during the campaign had been absent from the regiment in command of
a brigade. Eight companies were stationed at Warriore, and two were
detached with Major Dalrymple to Dindigul. In this situation the
regiment continued for the remainder of the year.

[Sidenote: 1793.]

In March, 1793, the eight companies under the command of
Lieut.-Colonel Baird proceeded from Warriore to Secundermally, in
the neighbourhood of Madura. Meanwhile the events of the French
Revolution had involved England in another contest, the National
Convention of France having declared war against Great Britain
and Holland in February, 1793. The news of this event arrived in
India in May following, when the siege of the French settlement
of Pondicherry, on the Coromandel coast, was determined upon.
Lieut.-Colonel Baird, of the Seventy-first, was appointed to command
a brigade on this service.

In July the flank companies of the regiment were ordered to join the
force about to besiege Pondicherry, and marched for that purpose,
being followed soon afterwards by the battalion companies. The place
surrendered on the 22nd of August, and the Seventy-first returned to
Secundermally and Dindigul, where it continued during the remainder
of the year.

[Sidenote: 1794.]

An attack upon the Mauritius was in contemplation at the commencement
of the year 1794, and troops for that service were assembled at
Wallajohabad. The Seventy-first, having received orders to join this
force, marched to Wallajohabad, where the regiment remained only
a short time, having been ordered to return to the southward, in
consequence of the projected expedition being relinquished.

The regiment marched accordingly, and arrived at Tanjore in June,
where it was stationed for the remainder of the year, having two
companies detached under Major Dalrymple at Vellum.

[Sidenote: 1795.]

Holland became united to France in the early part of 1795, and was
styled the Batavian Republic. Upon the arrival of this information
in India, an expedition was fitted out against the Island of Ceylon,
where the Dutch had several settlements. Major Dalrymple, with the
flank companies, marched to the coast, and embarked at Negapatam,
for the purpose of co-operating with the troops destined for Ceylon,
under the command of Colonel James Stuart, of the Seventy-second,
who was promoted to the rank of Major-General at this period. The
fleet arrived on the coast of Ceylon on the 1st of August, and two
days afterwards the troops landed four miles north of the fort of
Trincomalee. The siege of the fort was commenced as soon as the
artillery and stores could be landed and removed sufficiently near to
the place. On the 26th of August a practicable breach was effected,
and the garrison surrendered. The fort of Batticaloe surrendered on
the 18th of September, and the fort and island of Manaar capitulated
on the 5th of October. After these services were performed, the flank
companies returned to Tanjore in the month of October, having lost
11 men in killed and wounded. Captain William Charles Gorrie, of the
grenadier company, was desperately wounded in this expedition.

The following honourable mention of an officer in this regiment is
extracted from a letter of Sir Robert Abercromby to the Duke of York.

                                            “_Calcutta, November 4th._

  “I have the honour to inform you that Major Dirom having resigned
  his office of Deputy Adjutant-General in India, I have appointed
  Captain James Robertson, of the Seventy-first Regiment, who has
  acted for him since 1st July, 1792, to succeed until His Majesty’s
  pleasure is known, as Captain Robertson was included in the brevet
  of Major, made in March, 1794, though not yet published in India,
  and I am sensible any further mark of His Majesty’s favour will be
  pleasing to the Marquis Cornwallis, under whom he served, and I beg
  leave to recommend him for the rank of Lieut.-Colonel.”

[Sidenote: 1796.]

In May, 1796, the regiment marched to Wallajohabad, where it was
stationed during the remainder of the year.

[Sidenote: 1797.]

On the 2nd of January, 1797, the regiment was inspected by
Major-General Clarke, who issued the following general order:—

  “Major-General Clarke has experienced infinite satisfaction this
  morning at the review of His Majesty’s Seventy-first Regiment.

  “He cannot say that on any occasion of field exercise he ever was
  present at a more perfect performance.

  “When a corps is so striking in appearance, and so complete
  in every branch of its discipline, little can occur to the
  Commander-in-Chief to particularize. He cannot but notice, however,
  that the Seventy-first Regiment has excited his admiration for its
  expertness in those parts of its exercise which are most essential
  and most difficult to execute. He alludes to its order and
  regularity when moving in line, its extreme accuracy in preserving
  distance, and the neatness and promptitude that are so evident in
  all its formations. So much perfection in a corps whose services in
  India will long be held in remembrance, does the greatest honour to
  Lieut.-Colonel Baird and all his officers, to whom and the corps at
  large the Commander-in-Chief desires to offer his best thanks.”

The regiment remained in the cantonment of Wallajohabad until
the month of October, when orders were issued for its return to
Europe. It was accordingly drafted, giving five hundred men to the
Seventy-third and Seventy-fourth Regiments, and then marched from
Wallajohabad, under the command of Colonel Baird, to Madras, and
immediately embarked on board of Indiamen for Great Britain. The
fleet sailed from Madras Roads on the 17th of October, and was at
sea during the remainder of the year. A few days previous to its
embarkation the following order was published:—

                                          _“Fort St. George,
                                                 “October 16th, 1797._

  “General Order by Government.

  “The officers, non-commissioned officers, drummers, and privates
  of the Seventy-first Highlanders are under orders for Europe, to
  embark to-morrow morning at six. The President in Council has much
  satisfaction in expressing the great sense entertained by the
  Government of the active, zealous, and important services of the
  Seventy-first Highlanders during the eighteen years they have been
  stationed in India, by which they have contributed so largely to
  the reputation of the British Army, and so essentially promoted the
  interests of the East India Company.

  “By order of the Right Honourable the President in Council.

                             (Signed)      “S. WEBBE,
                                      “_Secretary to the Government_.”

This high testimonial of the approbation of the Civil Government
was accompanied by the following mark of commendation from the
Commander-in-Chief:—

  “General Order by Lieut.-General Harris.

  “The Commander-in-Chief cannot think of parting with a corps
  that has been so eminently distinguished as the Seventy-first
  Highlanders in India by a series of long, arduous, and spirited
  services, without requesting Lieut.-Colonel Baird, the officers,
  non-commissioned officers, and every man belonging to that regiment
  to accept of his warmest acknowledgments for conduct which has been
  equally honourable to them, and advantageous to their country.
  The alacrity with which Lieut.-Colonel Baird has arranged, at
  a short warning, everything relative to the drafting, confirms
  Lieutenant-General Harris in the favourable opinion he had
  formed of the internal order and discipline of that corps, and he
  trusts that the regularity and zeal of the men destined for the
  Seventy-third and Seventy-fourth Highlanders will be such as to
  maintain the high reputation they have so deservedly acquired.

                           (Signed)       “J. ROBERTSON,
                                           “_Deputy Adjutant-General_.

  “_Head-Quarters, Choultry Plain, “October 16th, 1797._”

[Sidenote: 1798.]

Early in January, 1798, the fleet arrived at the Cape of Good Hope,
where the commanding officer of the regiment, Colonel Baird, was
detained upon the Staff, having been appointed Brigadier-General.
After remaining a few days in Table Bay, the fleet sailed, and
reached St. Helena in February, where it was detained three months,
waiting for a convoy.

The fleet sailed on the 1st of May from St Helena, without a convoy,
and in July, in consequence of contrary winds, was compelled to
put into Cork Harbour. It sailed from thence for the Thames, and
on the 13th of August the regiment disembarked at Woolwich, where
it remained for a few days, and then re-embarked in smacks for
Leith. After landing, the regiment proceeded to Stirling. As a
mark of indulgence, a general leave for two months was granted to
the officers and men of the Seventy-first, to enable them to visit
their friends and families after the long absence from their native
country. At the expiration of this period, the whole assembled
at Stirling, with the addition of a few recruits[4]. Immediately
afterwards, the whole of the officers and non-commissioned officers,
with the exception of the Staff, and a few at head-quarters, were
sent out to recruit for the regiment.

Very few of the men remained who had originally formed the regiment;
of the officers, the following were still in the regiment:—

  Colonel Baird,
    ”     Dalrymple,
  Major Lindsay Robertson,
  Brevet-Major Borthwick,
      ”        Gorrie,
  Captain D. Ross,
    ”     Hugh Cuthbert,
    ”     Roderick McKenzie,
    ”     Hugh McKenzie.

[Sidenote: 1799.]

During the year 1799, the head-quarters remained at Stirling, and the
recruiting went on but slowly.

[Sidenote: 1800.]

In May, 1800, the strength of the regiment amounted to about 200 rank
and file, when a route arrived changing the quarters to Paisley, but
soon after the march an order arrived for its proceeding to Ireland.
In June the regiment reached Portpatrick, and crossed immediately
to Donaghadee, from whence it marched, under the command of Colonel
Dalrymple, to Newry, and in a few days afterwards was removed to
Dundalk.

In July the regiment received 600 volunteers from the Scotch Fencible
Corps serving in Ireland, and remained at Dundalk until the close
of the year, when a route for Dublin was received. At this period,
Colonel Dalrymple was appointed Brigadier-General, and the command of
the regiment devolved on Brevet Lieut.-Colonel John French.

On the 6th of December Major Denis Pack was promoted from the Fourth
Royal Irish Dragoon Guards to be Lieut.-Colonel in the Seventy-first
Regiment, in succession to Lieut.-Colonel the Honourable John
Lindsay, who retired from the service.

[Sidenote: 1801.]

The regiment, early in the year 1801, marched from Dundalk to Dublin,
and occupied the barracks in the Palatine Square. On the 24th of
April, Lieut.-Colonel Pack joined, and assumed the command of the
regiment.

[Sidenote: 1802.]

In March, 1802, in which month the Peace of Amiens was concluded, the
regiment proceeded from Dublin, and was quartered in the county of
Wicklow. The corps was so divided, that at Arklow, the head-quarters,
there were only two companies. In this situation it continued for the
remainder of the year.

[Sidenote: 1803.]

The regiment proceeded in March, 1803, in three divisions, to
Ballinasloe, where it remained for a few days, and afterwards marched
to Loughrea.

Major-General Sir John Francis Cradock, K.B., was appointed Colonel
of the Seventy-first Highlanders on the 6th of August, 1803, in
succession to General the Honourable William Gordon, who was removed
to the Twenty-first Royal North British Fusiliers.

The regiment continued at Loughrea, but the light company was
detached to Limerick to join a light battalion which was being formed
at that place. Captain Sinclair died during this year, and the
officers of the regiment caused a stone to be erected over his grave
bearing the following inscription:—

  “To the memory of Captain John Sinclair, this stone was caused to
  be placed by his brother officers of the Seventy-first Regiment,
  as a testimony of the high esteem they held him in as an officer,
  as well as the sincere love they bore him as a friend. Twenty-six
  years spent in zealous and faithful discharge of his duty justly
  entitled him to the character of the one, and the many estimable
  qualities of the heart gave him no less claim to the other; he
  died at the age of 41, in the year of our Lord 1803, resigning only
  with his breath that commission which His Gracious Majesty had
  pleased to bestow.”

[Sidenote: 1804.]

In May the regiment proceeded from Loughrea to the county of
Limerick; the head-quarters being stationed at Rathkeale, one
detachment at Newcastle, another at Tarbert, and a third at Askeaton.

[Sidenote: 2nd bat.]

While the regiment was stationed in Ireland, war had recommenced with
France, and Bonaparte having made preparations for invading Great
Britain, additional measures of defence to those of the former year
were adopted by the Government; and under the “_Additional Force
Act_,” passed on the 10th of July, 1804, a second battalion was added
to the Seventy-first Regiment, which was to consist of men to be
raised for limited service in certain counties of North Britain. The
second battalion was formed at Dumbarton in October, to the command
of which Lieut.-Colonel Lord George Beresford was appointed. Its
establishment was fixed at 23 sergeants, 22 drummers, 20 corporals,
1,380 privates.

[Sidenote: 1805.]

[Sidenote: 1st bat.]

In March, 1805, the first battalion, under the command of
Lieut.-Colonel Pack, proceeded to Bandon, in the county of Cork, and
was stationed at that place until July, when it marched to Cork, and
immediately afterwards to Monkstown, where it embarked in transports,
having been selected to form part of a secret expedition under its
former commander, Major-General Sir David Baird.

In the beginning of August the embarkation was completed, and on
the 5th of that month the fleet sailed, convoyed by three 64-gun
ships, two frigates and gun brigs, under the orders of Commodore Sir
Home Popham; and on the 28th of September the fleet, after a very
boisterous passage, arrived at Madeira.

On the 3rd of October the fleet left Madeira, and on the 12th
of November arrived at St. Salvador, in the Brazils, where an
opportunity was afforded of refreshing the men, landing the sick, and
procuring some horses for the cavalry.

The fleet again put to sea on the 28th of November, and directed its
course towards the Dutch Colony of the Cape of Good Hope, then in
possession of the Batavian Government, which was united with France
in hostility to Great Britain.

[Sidenote: 1806.]

It arrived at the high table-land of the Cape of Good Hope on the 4th
of January, 1806, and shortly afterwards came to anchor. The whole of
the following day the surf upon the shore of the bay was too violent
to admit of any attempt to land. Brigadier-General William Carr,
afterwards General Viscount Beresford, was detached, with such of the
cavalry as had horses, and the Thirty-eighth Regiment, to Saldanha
Bay.

In the morning of the 6th of January a landing was effected by the
Highland brigade, consisting of the Seventy-first, Seventy-second,
and Ninety-third Highlanders, and numbering 2,200 men, under the
command of Brigadier-General Ronald Craufurd Ferguson, in the
performance of which service Lieut.-Colonel Pack, the commanding
officer of the Seventy-first Regiment, was wounded. The following day
was devoted to landing the supplies and the remainder of the army.

Early in the morning of the 8th of January, Major-General Sir David
Baird formed his troops in two columns, and moved up to the heights
of Bleuberg, from whence the enemy was seen, drawn up in order of
battle, in two lines, with twenty-three pieces of cannon, his numbers
being calculated at 5,000, of which a large proportion was cavalry.

The British lines were formed with promptitude and correctness, and
the enemy was attacked with the utmost spirit. He maintained his
ground with some firmness, until a charge of the Highland brigade
dislodged and completely routed him, with the loss of three guns and
700 men.

In this affair the Seventy-first had Brevet Lieut.-Colonel Robert
Campbell wounded. 5 men were killed, and 2 sergeants and 64 rank and
file were wounded[5].

The troops halted for the night at the Reit Valley, and on the 9th
of January the army moved towards the Salt River, where it was
intended to take up a position previously to the attack of Cape Town,
when a flag of truce appeared from the town, which produced some
negociations, that terminated in its surrender to His Majesty’s arms.
Lieut.-General Janssens, the Governor of the colony, after his defeat
of Blenberg on the 8th, had retired towards the interior of the
country by the Hottentot Holland Kloof, or Pass, from whence, on the
19th of January, he signed and ratified the treaty that placed the
whole of the Cape of Good Hope and its dependencies in the possession
of Great Britain, under whose sway it has since continued.

[Sidenote: 1st bat.]

The following letter from Brigadier-General Ferguson to Major-General
Sir David Baird, relative to the regiment and its commander, is here
inserted:—

                                     “_Cape Town, 19th January, 1806._

  “Sir,

  “As in the affair of Bleuberg, on the 8th instant, chance placed
  two of the enemy’s guns in possession of the Highland brigade, I
  hope you will be pleased to order the allowance usually granted on
  such occasions to be issued and shared amongst the Seventy-first,
  Seventy-second, and Ninety-third Regiments.

  “Although the guns fell into our hands in front of the
  Seventy-first Highlanders, Lieut.-Colonel Pack (desirous that
  the three regiments should be considered as one family) has most
  handsomely withdrawn the prior claim His Majesty’s Seventy-first
  Highlanders might have made, and to which the situation of the
  guns, when taken, would have entitled that most excellent corps.

                                      “I have, etc.,
                              (Signed)       “R. C. FERGUSON,
                                                 “_Brigadier-General_.

  “_Major-General Sir David Baird._”

The Seventy-first went into quarters at the cantonment of Wynberg,
about seven miles from Cape Town, on the road to Simon’s Bay,
where the battalion remained until the 12th of April, when, most
unexpectedly, an order arrived for its immediate embarkation on an
expedition to the Rio de la Plata, in South America, which had been
planned by the British Commanders, naval and military, at the Cape.
The Seventy-first was the only corps of the Cape garrison destined
for this service, with the addition of a few dragoons and some
artillery. At this period the strength of the battalion amounted to
800 rank and file, having received some recruits from foreign corps
at the Cape. The troops were to be commanded by Brigadier-General
William Carr Beresford, afterwards Viscount Beresford.

The battalion was embarked in line-of-battle ships and transports,
and on the 14th of April the fleet sailed from Table Bay, directing
its course to the westward until the 20th, when, in consequence of
unfavourable weather, and having parted company with one of the
transports in which were three companies of the Seventy-first, the
signal was made to rendezvous at St. Helena, at which island the
fleet arrived on the 30th of April, with the exception of the missing
transport. Here the force under Brigadier-General Beresford received
an augmentation of 200 men from the St. Helena Regiment, making a
total of 1,087 rank and file.

On the 2nd of May the fleet sailed from St. Helena, and after a
tedious voyage arrived at Cape St. Mary at the entrance of the Rio de
la Plata, on the 8th of June, where it met with the missing transport.

The troops that had sailed in the line-of-battle ships were
transferred on the 16th of June to the transports, which proceeded
up the river, and on the 24th of that month came to anchor opposite
the city of Buenos Ayres. The force amounted in all to 1,466 rank and
file; the Seventy-first mustered 784 rank and file. On the 25th, at
night, the Seventy-first, with the other troops, effected a landing
without any opposition. The following morning they pushed forward,
and met the enemy at the village of Reduccion, who made a trifling
stand, and then retired towards the city. On this occasion Captain
Henry Le Blanc of the Seventy-first lost his leg, and a sergeant and
5 rank and file were wounded.

The British troops continued to advance in pursuit of the enemy, and
on the morning of the 27th of June forced their passage across the
Rio Chuelo. Some skirmishing followed this movement, but the city
of Buenos Ayres almost immediately surrendered. In the evening the
town and fort were taken possession of by the first battalion of the
Seventy-first and detachments of marines and St. Helena Regiment.
Major-General Beresford, in his despatch to Sir David Baird, wrote as
follows:—

  “I cannot omit reporting to you that I had the most just cause to
  be satisfied with the conduct of every officer and all the troops
  under my command; to Lieut.-Colonel Pack, of the Seventy-first
  Highlanders, every praise is due, as well as to that excellent
  regiment.”

The Seventy-first occupied barracks in Buenos Ayres, and remained
undisturbed until the beginning of August, by which time the enemy
had collected a force of about 1,500 men, under a leader named
Pueridon, at five leagues from the city. Brigadier-General Beresford
in consequence moved out with 300 of the Seventy-first, 50 from the
St. Helena Regiment, and six field pieces; attacked and dispersed
the enemy, taking all his artillery, namely, ten pieces of various
calibre. The battalion had only 5 men wounded in this operation.

About this period a body of the enemy, headed by Colonel Liniers,
a French officer in the service of Spain, crossed from Colonna to
Concher, evidently with hostile intentions. Forming a junction with
the force under Pueridon, the whole marched upon Buenos Ayres.

On the 10th of August the enemy commenced operations by the massacre
of a sergeant and his guard of the Seventy-first Regiment, who
were posted at a place in the suburbs where the bull-fights were
usually exhibited. On the following day much skirmishing ensued
in the outskirts of the city, the enemy taking possession of the
tops of houses, from which he kept up a galling and destructive
fire. During this time the main body of the British force took up a
position in the Grand Square, but afterwards retired into the fort
of Buenos Ayres. Being now bereft of all resources, and having no
hope of support, no alternative remained but to capitulate. At about
one o’clock, therefore, the fort was surrendered to the enemy and
hostilities ceased. The troops marched out with the honours of war,
and laid down their arms in the square. The officers being granted
parole were quartered upon the inhabitants of the town, and the men
were confined in the prisons of the city.

In these melancholy proceedings Lieut. Mitchell and Ensign Lucas were
killed, and the regiment lost 91 men in killed and wounded.

[Sidenote: 2nd bat.]

In August, 1806, the second battalion embarked at Glasgow for
Ireland, and arrived at Belfast on the 1st of September.

[Sidenote: 1st bat.]

About the middle of September the Seventy-first were removed from
Buenos Ayres into the interior. Brigadier-General Beresford, with
his staff, and Lieut.-Colonel Pack, were placed at Luxon, from
whence they subsequently effected their escape, upon learning that
the removal of the prisoners still further up the country had been
ordered.

[Sidenote: 1807.]

Lieut.-Colonel Pack was thus enabled to join the troops which had
landed near Monte Video in January, 1807, under the command of
Brigadier-General Sir Samuel Auchmuty, who at Lieut.-Colonel Pack’s
request, directed a board of naval and military officers to inquire
into the particulars of his escape, by whom it was unanimously
approved, and he was declared free to serve.

[Sidenote: 2nd bat.]

The second battalion was removed from Ireland to Scotland in January,
1807, but returned to Ireland in June following.

[Sidenote: 1st bat.]

In May, 1807, a further removal to the interior of the prisoners
took place. The officers were collected at a college belonging to
the Jesuits about forty leagues to the northward of Cordova, and
entirely separated from their men. In this situation they remained
until August following, when, just as they were ordered to prepare
for a transfer to a station still more remote, the accounts of the
convention entered into by Lieut.-General John Whitelocke were
received, by which it was stipulated that the prisoners should be
restored to liberty on condition that all the British forces should
be withdrawn. It is scarcely necessary to remark that the prospect
of being restored to liberty and friends was greatly damped by the
military events which produced it, and which completely extinguished
the ardent hopes of success that had been entertained from the
arrival of the last British force in South America.

In September the whole of the officers and men were reconducted to
Buenos Ayres, from whence they were conveyed in boats to Monte Video,
and there embarked in transports with a view of returning to Europe.

It is a circumstance highly creditable to the character of the
soldiers of the Seventy-first that, although so many powerful
allurements were held out to induce them to remain in South America,
but few individuals were found to swerve from their duty and
allegiance to their King and country. The Spaniards were very fond
of the Highlanders, particularly of those who were Catholics. One
of these, named Donald Macdonald, overcome by solicitations, had
almost agreed to remain at Buenos Ayres, but whilst wavering one
of his companions sung to him “Lochaber no more;” the effect was
irresistible; the tears started into poor Donald’s eyes, and wiping
them away, he exclaimed, “Na, na! I canna stay, I’d maybe return to
Lochaber nae mair.”

The fleet sailed immediately, and after a tedious and rough voyage
of three months, the transports having the Seventy-first on board
put into Cork Harbour in December, and on the 27th of that month the
whole were landed, without uniform, clothing, arms, or accoutrements,
and marched to Middleton under the command of Major Henry Tolley,
Lieut.-Colonel Pack having previously returned to England from South
America.

[Sidenote: 1808.]

In March, 1808, the regiment proceeded from Middleton to Cork, where
its equipment in every respect was completed.

[Sidenote: 2nd bat.]

The second battalion embarked at Londonderry for Scotland on the 9th
of April, 1808, after transferring 200 men to the first battalion,
which raised the strength of the latter to nearly 900 rank and file.

[Sidenote: 1st bat.]

On the 26th of April, whilst in garrison at Cork, new colours,
to replace those left in South America, were presented to the
Seventy-first by Lieut.-General John Floyd, who had commanded the
cavalry and advance in the campaign of 1790 in the East Indies.

The following animating and soldier-like address was made by the
gallant General on the occasion:—

  “Seventy-first!!

  “I am directed to perform the honourable duty of presenting your
  colours.

  “Brave Seventy-first, the world is well acquainted with your
  gallant conduct at the capture of Buenos Ayres in South America,
  under one of His Majesty’s bravest Generals.

  “It is well known that you defended your conquest with the utmost
  courage, good conduct, and discipline, to the last extremity. When
  diminished to a handful, hopeless of succour, and destitute of
  provisions, you were overwhelmed by multitudes, and reduced by the
  fortune of war to lose your liberty and your well-defended colours,
  but not your honour. Your honour, Seventy-first Regiment, remains
  unsullied.

  “Your last act in the field covered you with glory. Your generous
  despair, calling upon your General to suffer you to die with
  arms in your hands, proceeded from the genuine spirit of British
  soldiers. Your behaviour in prosperity—your sufferings in
  captivity—and your faithful discharge of your duty to your King and
  country, are appreciated by all.

  “You who now stand on this parade, in defiance of the allurements
  held out to base desertion, are endeared to the army and to the
  country, and your conduct will ensure you the esteem of all true
  soldiers—of all worthy men—and fill every one of you with honest
  martial pride.

  “It has been my good fortune to have witnessed, in a remote
  part of the world, the early glories and gallant conduct of
  the Seventy-first Regiment in the field; and it is with great
  satisfaction I meet you again with replenished ranks, with good
  arms in your hands, and with stout hearts in your bosoms.

  “Look forward, officers and soldiers, to the achievement of new
  honours and the acquirement of fresh fame!!

  “Officers! be the friends and guardians of these brave fellows
  committed to your charge!!

  “Soldiers! give your confidence to your officers. They have shared
  with you the chances of war; they have bravely bled along with
  you,—they will always do honour to themselves and you. Preserve
  your regiment’s reputation for valour in the field and regularity
  in quarters.

  “I have now the honour to present the

                             “Royal Colour.

                      “This is the King’s colour!!

  “I have now the honour to present your regimental colour.

  “This is the colour of the Seventy-first Regiment.

  “May victory for ever crown these colours!!!”

The Peninsula was at this period the centre of political interest.
Portugal, deserted by her government, and Spain betrayed, the
people of each rose in arms to recover the national independence.
Dissensions had arisen in the Royal family of Spain, occasioned
by the sway of Emanuel Godoy, who bore the title of the “Prince
of Peace.” This Minister was dismissed, but the Court was unable
to restore tranquillity. In this emergency the French Emperor was
solicited to be umpire, and Napoleon ultimately placed the crown of
Spain on his brother Joseph, who was transferred from the throne
of Naples. The Spaniards flew to arms in consequence. The British
Government resolved to aid the Spanish and Portuguese patriots, and
a British army was ordered to proceed to the Peninsula, under the
command of Lieut.-General Sir Arthur Wellesley. The first battalion
of the Seventy-first Highlanders formed part of the force selected on
this occasion.

It embarked at the Cove of Cork on the 17th of June, 1808, its
strength consisting of 52 sergeants, 22 drummers, and 874 rank and
file.

In June, 1808, His Majesty King George III was pleased to approve of
the Seventy-first bearing the title of _Glasgow_ in addition to the
appellation of _Highland_ regiment.[6]

In the first instance, the Seventy-first were brigaded with the
Fifth, Thirty-eighth, and fifth battalion of the Sixtieth Regiment,
under Brigadier-General Henry Fane, and sailed for Portugal, in
conjunction with the forces destined to aid the Spaniards and
Portuguese, on the 12th of July. After a favourable passage, the
troops anchored in Mondego Bay in the beginning of August, and a
landing was effected in the vicinity of the village of Frejus.

Early in the morning of the 4th of August a small picket of the
enemy stationed in the neighbourhood fell back, and the operation of
disembarking the troops was carried into effect without opposition.
The army then moved on to a position across a deep sandy country,
where it halted and encamped for the night.

At this period a change took place in the arrangement of the
brigades, and the first battalion of the Seventy-first was placed,
with the Thirty-sixth and Fortieth Regiments, in that commanded by
Major-General Ronald Craufurd Ferguson.

The division under Major-General Sir Brent Spencer, K.B., from Cadiz,
consisting of about 4,000 men, joined on the 8th of August; and,
after a short halt, the army was again put in motion to occupy a
more forward position, where it remained for some days. On the 17th
August the enemy, commanded by General Laborde, was encountered near
Roleia. The position was attacked and carried with great loss to the
French, who retreated to Torres Vedras.

The light company of the Seventy-first was the only part of the
regiment engaged, the remainder being employed in manœuvring on the
right flank of the French. It suffered a trifling loss, having but 1
man killed and 2 wounded.

The Seventy-first subsequently received the Royal authority to bear
the word “Roleia” on the regimental colours and appointments, in
commemoration of this victory.

Lieut.-General Sir Arthur Wellesley, after the battle of Roleia, did
not pursue the enemy by the high roads, but, keeping to the right
near the sea, marched to Vimiera to cover the landing of a brigade
commanded by Major-General Anstruther, which was effected on the 20th
of August.

The morning of the 21st of August was given up to the troops, in
order to prepare and repose themselves. The men were engaged in
washing and cleaning their equipments, when the approach of the
enemy, moving to the left, was discovered at eight o’clock in the
morning, and the brigades commanded by Major-General Ferguson,
Brigadier-Generals Nightingall, Acland, and Bowes, were consequently
moved across a valley from the heights on the west to those on the
east of Vimiera.

Marshal Junot, Duke of Abrantes, moved on his army to the attack of
the position, directing it on the British centre, where the Fiftieth
Regiment was posted, and moving along the front gradually to the left
until the whole line became engaged.

A short time previously to this, the soldiers of the brigade were
ordered to sit down, with their arms in their hands, keeping their
formation. The enemy in the meantime cannonaded the whole line, and
pushed on his sharpshooters and infantry. To oppose the former,
Major-General Ferguson ordered the left sections of the companies
to move forward and skirmish. Upon the retreat of the enemy’s
sharpshooters, the action became general along the front of this
brigade, and the whole moved forward to the attack. Nothing could
surpass the steadiness of the troops on this occasion, and the
general and commanding officers set a noble example, which was
followed by all.

The grenadier company of the Seventy-first greatly distinguished
itself, in conjunction with a subdivision of the light company of
the Thirty-sixth Regiment. Captain Alexander Forbes, who commanded
the grenadier company, was ordered to the support of some British
artillery, and seizing a favourable opportunity, made a dash at
a battery of the enemy’s artillery immediately in his front. He
succeeded in capturing five guns and a howitzer, with horses,
caissons, and equipment complete. In this affair alone the grenadier
company had Lieutenants John Pratt and Ralph Dudgeon and 13 rank and
file wounded, together with 2 men killed.

The French made a daring effort to retake their artillery both with
cavalry and infantry; but the gallant conduct of the grenadier
company, and the advance of Major-General Ferguson’s brigade, finally
left the guns in the possession of those who had so gallantly
captured them.

George Clark, one of the pipers of the regiment, and afterwards
piper to the Highland Society of London, was severely wounded in
this action, and being unable to accompany his corps in the advance
against the enemy, he deliberately sat down, and unstrapping his
pipes, called out, “Well my bra’ lads, I can no farther wi’ ye a
fighting, but diel ha’ my soul if ye sal want music,” and immediately
began playing “Up and war them a’ Willie.” He was afterwards
presented with a handsome stand of pipes by the Highland Society.
This is the second instance in which the pipers of the Seventy-first
have behaved with particular gallantry, and evinced high feeling for
the credit and honour of the corps.

During the advance of the battalion, several prisoners were taken,
among whom was the French General Brennier, who surrendered himself
on the columns giving way to corporal John M^cKay. The latter was
afterwards promoted to an ensigncy in the Fourth West India Regiment.

The result of this battle was the total defeat of the enemy, who
subsequently retreated on Lisbon, with the loss of twenty-one pieces
of cannon, twenty-three ammunition waggons, with powder, shells,
stores of all descriptions, and 20,000 rounds of musket ammunition,
together with a great many officers and soldiers killed, wounded, and
taken prisoners.

The conduct of the battalion, and of its commanding officer,
Lieut.-Colonel Pack, was noticed in the public despatches, and the
thanks of the Houses of Parliament were conferred on the troops.

The following officers of the Seventy-first were wounded in the
battle of Vimiera: Captains Arthur Jones and Maxwell Mackenzie;
Lieutenants John Pratt, William Hartley, Augustus M^cIntyre, and
Ralph Dudgeon; Ensign James Campbell, and Acting Adjutant R.
M^cAlpine. Twelve rank and file were killed; six sergeants, and
eighty-six rank and file wounded.

The Seventy-first subsequently received the royal authority to bear
the word “Vimiera” on the regimental colour and appointments, in
commemoration of this battle.

The _Convention of Cintra_ was the result of this victory; it was
signed on the 30th of August, and by its provisions the French Army
evacuated Portugal.

The British Army was ordered to move forward to Lisbon, some of the
reinforcements for it having preceded it by water, and occupied
the forts at the mouth of the Tagus. The French Army having by
this convention fallen back on Lisbon, the British proceeded to the
vicinity of Fort St. Julien, and encamped there.

All the objects of the expedition being carried into effect, and the
French troops embarked for France, the British Army remained for
some time at Lisbon and its vicinity. At this period (September)
Lieut.-General Sir John Moore, having assumed the command, made
dispositions for entering Spain.

The first battalion of the Seventy-first was now brigaded with the
Thirty-sixth and Ninety-eighth Regiments, under Brigadier-General
Catlin Craufurd, and placed in the division under the command of
Lieut.-General the Honourable John Hope, afterwards the Earl of
Hopetoun. On the 27th of October the division was put in motion,
and after a short stay at Badajoz, resumed the march, proceeding
by Merida, Truxillo, Jaraicejo, Puerto-de-Merivette, and crossing
the Tagus at the bridge of Almaraz, directed its route upon
Talavera-de-la-Reyna. From this town the column proceeded to the
Escurial, seven leagues to the north-west of Madrid.

Intelligence was here received of the enemy’s approach towards
Madrid, and two companies of the Seventy-first, under Major Archibald
Campbell, were pushed forward to occupy the important pass in the
Guadarama Mountains, which separate Old from New Castile. After a
halt of a few days, the division was put in motion over the Guadarama
Pass to Villa Castin, at which place Lieut.-General the Honourable
John Hope, in consequence of the intelligence which he received of
the enemy’s movements, made a night march to the left, by Avila and
Peneranda, and finally proceeded to Alba de Tormes. At the latter
place a junction was formed with a detachment from the army under
Lieut.-General Sir John Moore, then at Salamanca. The army under Sir
John Moore was shortly afterwards put in motion towards Valladolid,
and subsequently to the left, to form a junction with Lieut.-General
Sir David Baird’s division, which had landed at Corunna.

Previously to this period, the Spanish Armies under General
Blake, near Bilboa on the left, General Castanos in the centre,
and General Palafox lower down the Ebro on the right, had been
completely defeated. Lieut.-General Sir John Moore consequently
made arrangements for a retreat on Portugal by Ciudad Rodrigo; but
it having been represented to him that Madrid held out against the
French, he was induced to effect a junction with Lieut.-General Sir
David Baird, in order to make a diversion in favour of Madrid, by
attacking Marshal Soult on the River Carion.

The British force, twenty-nine thousand strong, joined at Toro on
the 21st of December, and on the 23rd of that month Sir John Moore
advanced with the whole army. The cavalry had already met with that
of the enemy, and the infantry was within two hours’ march of him,
when an intercepted letter informed the British Commander that
Napoleon, who had entered Madrid on the 4th of December, was then in
full march for Salamanca and Benevente. A retreat on Corunna, through
Gallicia, was immediately decided on, that through Portugal being
then impracticable.

Accordingly the several divisions marched towards the Esla, the
greater part crossing by the bridge of Benevente. On the 26th of
December, after a day’s halt, the cavalry under Lieut.-General Lord
Paget and Brigadier-General the Honourable Charles Stewart had an
engagement with some of the Imperial Guards that had forded the River
Esla under General Le Févre, who was made prisoner, with several of
his men.

At this period the situation of the British Army was dispiriting
in the extreme. In the midst of winter, in a dreary and desolate
country, the soldiers chilled and drenched with the heavy rains,
and wearied by long and rapid marches, were almost destitute of fuel
to cook their victuals, and it was with extreme difficulty that
they could procure shelter. Provisions were scarce, irregularly
issued, and difficult of attainment. The waggons, in which were
their magazines, baggage and stores, were often deserted in the
night by the Spanish drivers, who were terrified by the approach of
the French. Thus baggage, ammunition, stores, and even money were
destroyed to prevent them falling into the hands of the enemy; and
the weak, the sick, and the wounded were necessarily left behind. The
Seventy-first suffered in proportion with the rest, and by weakness,
sickness, and fatigue lost about 93 men.

[Sidenote: 1809.]

[Sidenote: 1st bat.]

On the 5th of January, 1809, a position was taken up at Lugo,
where some skirmishing occurred, in which three companies of the
Seventy-first were engaged, and repulsed the enemy.

Lieut.-General Francis Dundas was appointed from the Ninety-fourth
Regiment to be Colonel of the Seventy-first on the 7th of January,
1809, in succession to Lieut.-General Sir John Francis Cradock, K.B.,
removed to the Forty-third Regiment.

The retreat was again commenced on the 9th of January, and on the
11th the army, still nearly fifteen thousand strong, reached Corunna.
The British Army, having accomplished one of the most celebrated
retreats recorded in modern history, repulsing the pursuing enemy in
all his attacks, and having traversed two hundred and fifty miles
of mountainous country, accompanied by severe privation, was not
destined to embark for England without a battle.

The transports not having arrived, a position was occupied in
advance of Corunna, and some sharp skirmishing ensued, in which four
companies of the Seventy-first were warmly engaged, and lost several
men in killed and wounded. Lieutenant William Lockwood was severely
wounded. On this ground the battle of Corunna was fought on the 16th
of January; but the Seventy-first being placed on the extreme left
of the British line, had little part in it. The result of the action
was glorious to the British Army, but was darkened by the loss of
Lieut.-General Sir John Moore, who received a severe wound during the
battle, and died at ten o’clock on the same night. His remains were
wrapped in a military cloak, and interred in the Citadel of Corunna,
over which Marshal Soult, with the true feeling of a soldier, erected
a monument.

Lieut.-General Sir David Baird, who succeeded to the command upon Sir
John Moore being wounded, was also wounded, and the command devolved
upon Lieut.-General the Honourable John Hope.

At eight o’clock on the night of the 16th of January the troops
quitted their position, leaving the pickets posted and a few men to
keep up the fires, and then marched into Corunna, where they embarked
for England on the following day.

In commemoration of this battle, and of the conduct of the battalion
during the expedition, the Seventy-first, in common with the army
employed under Lieut.-General Sir John Moore, received the royal
authority to bear the word “Corunna” on the regimental colour and
appointments.

The thanks of both Houses of Parliament were conferred on the troops,
and were communicated to Lieut.-Colonel Pack by Lieut.-General Sir
David Baird in the following letter:—

                                    “_Portsmouth, 30th January, 1809._

  “Sir,

  “I have great pleasure in transmitting to you copies of letters
  from the Lord Chancellor and the Speaker of the House of Commons,
  enclosing the resolutions of both Houses of Parliament, dated 25th
  of January, 1809, which contain the thanks of those Houses to the
  army lately engaged before Corunna.

  “In communicating to you, Sir, this most signal mark of the
  approbation of the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great
  Britain and Ireland, allow me to add my warmest congratulations
  upon a distinction which you, and the corps under your command on
  that day, had a share in obtaining for His Majesty’s service.

                                      “I have, etc.,
                              (Signed)       “DAVID BAIRD,
                                                    “_Lieut.-General_.

  “_Officer commanding first battalion
      “Seventy-first Highlanders._”

After the battalion had landed at Ramsgate it was marched to Ashford,
in Kent, where it continued for some time collecting the men, who,
from contrary winds, were driven into different ports.

While at Ashford the battalion was brigaded with the Warwick Militia
and the Ninety-first Regiment, under Brigadier-General the Baron de
Rottenburg. Great sickness prevailed at this station, and Surgeon
James Evans and several of the soldiers died of typhus fever.

On the 20th of March, 1809, the Royal authority was granted for the
Seventy-first to be formed into a light infantry regiment, since
which time it has been distinguished as the Highland Light Infantry.

The first battalion marched on the 27th of April, 1809, for
Brabourne-Lees Barracks, and was brigaded with the Sixty-eighth and
Eighty-fifth Light Infantry Regiments. Every exertion was here made
to increase the strength and improve the discipline of the corps.
In June the first battalion was increased by a large reinforcement,
consisting of several officers and 311 non-commissioned officers and
privates from the second battalion, which continued to be stationed
in North Britain. Several volunteers from the militia were also
received at this period.

Immense preparations had been made by the British Government to fit
out the most formidable armament that had for a long time proceeded
from England. The troops, amounting to 40,000 men, were commanded by
Lieut.-General the Earl of Chatham. The naval portion consisted of 39
ships of the line, 35 frigates, and numerous gunboats, bomb-vessels,
and other small craft, under Admiral Sir Richard Strachan. The object
of the expedition was to obtain possession of the islands at the
mouth of the Scheldt and to destroy the French ships in that river,
with the docks and arsenals at Antwerp. The first battalion of the
Seventy-first, towards the end of June, received orders to prepare
for the above service, and marched on the 28th and 29th of that month
in two divisions, encamping near Gosport.

On the 16th of July the battalion, consisting of 3 field officers, 6
captains, 27 subalterns, 5 staff, 48 sergeants, and 974 drummers and
rank and file, embarked at Portsmouth on board His Majesty’s ships
_Belleisle_ and _Impérieuse_, and towards the end of the month sailed
for the Downs.

The battalion was brigaded, under Brigadier-General the Baron de
Rottenburg, with the Sixty-eighth and Eighty-fifth Light Infantry, in
the division commanded by Lieut.-General Alexander Mackenzie Fraser,
and in the corps of Lieut.-General Sir Eyre Coote, K.B.

The expedition sailed from the Downs on the 28th of July, and having
arrived off the Roompet Channel, preparations were made for landing;
small craft to cover the landing were also sent in shore, and the
light brigade, composed of the Sixty-eighth, Seventy-first, and
Eighty-fifth Light Infantry, were landed under their fire. In an
instant they were in contact with the enemy’s sharpshooters, who
fell back, skirmishing. Being pushed hard, four guns, with their
equipment and several prisoners, were taken by two companies of the
Seventy-first, under Captains George Sutherland and Henry Hall, and
one company of the Eighty-fifth.

A battery and flag-staff on the coast were taken possession of by the
tenth company of the Seventy-first, and in lieu of a flag a soldier’s
red jacket was hoisted on it.

This advance having succeeded at all points, and the enemy having
fallen back on Flushing and Middleburg, the army was disembarked.
The advance then dividing, proceeded by different routes. The
Seventy-first moved by the sea dyke on a fort called Ter Veer, the
situation and strength of which was not sufficiently known, an
enemy’s deserter having given but imperfect intelligence respecting
it.

After nightfall the column continued to advance in perfect silence,
with orders to attack the post with the bayonet, when, on a sudden
the advance-guard fell in with an enemy’s party, who came out for
the purpose of firing some houses which overlooked the works. The
column following the advance-guard had entered an avenue or road
leading to the fort, when the advance commenced the action with the
enemy, who, retiring within the place, opened a tremendous fire from
his works with artillery and musketry. Some guns pointing down the
road by which the battalion advanced did great execution, and the
Seventy-first had Surgeon Charles Henry Quin killed, and about 18
men killed and wounded. The column, after some firing retired, and
the place was the next day regularly invested by sea and land. It
took three days to reduce, when it capitulated, with its stores and a
garrison of 800 men.

Flushing having been invested on the 1st of August, the
Seventy-first, after the surrender of Ter Veer, were ordered into
the line of circumvallation, and placed on the extreme left, resting
on the Scheldt. The preparations for the attack on the town having
been completed, on the 13th a dreadful fire was opened from the
batteries and bomb-vessels, and congreve-rockets having been thrown
into the town, it was on fire in many places. The ships having joined
in the attack, the enemy’s fire slackened, and at length ceased. A
summons being sent in, a delay was demanded, but, being rejected, the
firing recommenced.

On the 14th of August one of the outworks was carried at the point
of the bayonet by a party of detachments and two companies of the
Seventy-first under Lieut.-Colonel Pack.

In this affair, Ensign Donald Sinclair of the Seventy-first was
killed; Captain George Spottiswoode and a few men were wounded.

Flushing, with its garrison of 6,000 men, capitulated on the 15th of
August, and the right gate was occupied by a detachment of 300 men
of the First or Royal Scots, and the left gate by a detachment of
similar strength of the Seventy-first under Major Arthur Jones. The
naval arsenal and some vessels of war which were on the stocks, fell
into the hands of the British.

The Seventy-first proceeded shortly afterwards to Middleburg, where
the battalion remained for a few days, when it was ordered to
occupy Ter Veer, of which place Lieut.-Colonel Pack was appointed
Commandant, and Lieutenant Henry Clements, of the Seventy-first, Town
Major. The battalion remained doing duty in the garrison until this
island, after destroying the works, etc, was finally evacuated on the
22nd of December.

On the 23rd of December the battalion embarked in transports and
sailed for England, after a service of five months in a very
unhealthy climate, which cost the battalion the loss of the following
officers and men:—

                                            Sergeants, Drummers,
                                Officers.   and Rank and File.
  Died on service                  1              57
  Killed                           2              19
  Died after return home           2               9
                                  --              --
                                   5              85

In passing Cadsand, that fort opened a fire on the transports, one
of which, having part of the Seventy-first on board, was struck by a
round shot which carried off Sergeant Steel’s legs above the knees.[7]

On the 25th of December the first battalion of the Seventy-first
disembarked at Deal, and marched to Brabourne-Lees barracks, in Kent,
where it was again brigaded with the Sixty-eighth and Eighty-fifth
Light Infantry, and was occupied in keeping itself in an efficient
state for active service.

[Sidenote: 1810.]

Upon the Seventy-first being made light infantry, they were
permitted to retain such parts of the national dress as might not be
inconsistent with their duties as a light corps. A correspondence on
the subject took place as follows between Lieut.-Colonel Pack and the
Adjutant-General in April, 1810:—

  “Sir,

  “I beg leave to state that until I read the Adjutant-General’s
  letter of the 31st January last, a copy of which I have the honour
  herewith to enclose, I did not think it possible any misconception
  could exist as to the Seventy-first being no longer considered
  a Highland Regiment, having myself clearly understood from His
  Royal Highness the Duke of York and the present Commander-in-Chief
  that in becoming light infantry the corps was to be put, as to
  Colonel’s allowances, clothing, and appointments, exactly on the
  same establishment as English regiments of the line, being only
  allowed to retain our name and such characteristics of the old
  corps as were in no way found objectionable, and out of which in
  point of ‘esprit de corps’ much good and no possible harm could
  arise, and it was under this impression that the bonnet cocked as a
  regimental cap was submitted to the Horse Guards for approval, and
  was sealed by the Adjutant-General for our use. With this security
  I should now rest satisfied, but on a point affecting the honour
  of the regiment, I cannot allow a shadow of doubt to rest. I have,
  therefore, to entreat the Commander-in-Chief that unquestionable
  authority may be given for our wearing the bonnet so cocked, for
  retaining our pipes, and still dressing our pipers in the Highland
  garb. It cannot be forgotten how those pipes were obtained, and how
  constantly the regiment has upheld its title to them. These are
  the honourable characteristics alluded to, which must preserve to
  future times the previous remains of the old corps, and of which I
  feel confident His Majesty never will have reason to deprive the
  Seventy-first Regiment.

                     “I have the honour to be,
                                “Sir,
                              “Your most obedient servant,
                                   (Signed)      “D. PACK,
                                        “_Lieut.-Colonel Seventy-first
                                                 “Regiment_.

  “_The Adjutant-General of the Forces, “Horse Guards London._”


                                           “_Horse Guards,
                                                   “12th April, 1810._

  “Sir,

  “Having submitted to the Commander-in-Chief your letter of the 4th
  instant, I am directed to state that there is no objection to the
  Seventy-first being denominated Highland Light Infantry Regiment,
  or to their retaining their pipes, and the Highland garb for the
  pipers, and that they will, of course, be permitted to wear caps
  according to the pattern which was lately approved and sealed by
  authority.

                                    “I have, &c.,
                         (Signed)       “WILLIAM WYNWARD,
                                           “_Deputy Adjutant-General_.

  “_Lieut.-Colonel Pack, Seventy-first
           “Regiment._”

On the 8th of May, 1810, the first battalion marched to Deal
Barracks, where every exertion was continued to render it fit for
active service. Here the battalion was deprived of the services of
Lieut.-Colonel Pack, who was appointed a brigadier in the Portuguese
army under Marshal William Carr Beresford, afterwards General the
Viscount Beresford.

Nothing of moment occurred until the early part of September, when
the battalion received orders to hold six companies in readiness for
foreign service. They were prepared accordingly by drafting into
them, from the companies which were to remain at home, the most
effective officers and men, several not having recovered from the
Walcheren fever.

The following were the companies selected and completed for foreign
service, namely:—

  1st or Capt. M^cIntyre’s.
  2nd   ”      Hall’s.
  3rd   ”      Adamson’s.
  4th   ”      Walker’s.
  6th   ”      Spottiswoode’s.
  10th  ”      Lewis Grant’s.

They consisted of 2 field officers, 6 captains, 15 lieutenants, 7
ensigns, 4 staff, 38 sergeants, 12 drummers, and 603 rank and file.

On the 14th of September the above companies embarked in the Downs
on board the Melpomene and St. Fiorenzo frigates, three companies
with the staff, and Brevet Lieut.-Colonel Nathaniel Levett Peacocke,
on board the former; the remaining three companies, under Brevet
Lieut.-Colonel Thomas Reynell, afterwards colonel of the regiment,
on board the latter. They sailed on the following day for Lisbon,
and entered the Tagus on the 25th of September, after a short and
pleasant passage. The companies were disembarked on the following
day, and quartered in the San Benito and Espirito Santo convents.

The greatest exertions were made to complete the companies in field
equipment, bât-mules, &c., which being effected, the detachment
marched from Lisbon on the 2nd of October to Mafra, where it was
shortly afterwards joined by Lieut.-Colonel the Honourable Henry
Cadogan, who assumed the command, and Lieut.-Colonel Peacocke
returned to the second battalion in North Britain. The detachment
being ordered to join the army under Lieut.-General Viscount
Wellington, then retreating before Marshal Massena, Prince of
Essling, marched from Mafra on the 8th of October, and on the 10th
of that month effected the junction at Sobral, where it was brigaded
with the Fiftieth and Ninety-second Regiments under Major-General Sir
William Erskine, in the first division under Lieut.-General Sir Brent
Spencer, K.B.

The army having retired into a position in the rear of Sobral, that
place was occupied by the Seventy-first, having for its support the
Fiftieth and Ninety-second Regiments and Major-General Alan Cameron’s
brigade. On the 12th of October the pickets were violently attacked
by the enemy’s advance, and retired skirmishing. In the meantime the
place was ordered to be evacuated, and the pickets having joined, the
Seventy-first took up a position on the outside, within musket-shot
of the town. In this affair the detachment had 8 men killed and 34
wounded.

In this position the Seventy-first continued, when on the 14th of
October they were again attacked with the greatest impetuosity,
and charged with the bayonet. The enemy was completely repulsed,
with very considerable loss in killed and wounded, being chased to
the spot from which he made the attack. Both parties resumed their
original position.

In Viscount Wellington’s despatch reporting this affair, the names
of Lieut.-Colonel the Honourable Henry Cadogan, commanding the
Seventy-first, and that of Brevet Lieut.-Col. Thomas Reynell, were
particularly mentioned.

A soldier of the sixth company, named John Rea, behaved on this
occasion in the most gallant manner, and particularly distinguished
himself, for which he received a silver medal with the following
inscription:—“To John Rea, for his exemplary courage and good conduct
as a soldier at Sobral, 14th October, 1810.”

On the 15th of October the Seventy-first was ordered to withdraw into
the position at Zibriera, which was in continuation of the lines of
Torres Vedras. In this celebrated position, which bid defiance to the
French army, the troops were constantly on the alert, occupied in
rendering it as strong as circumstances would admit, and in observing
the motions of the enemy.

Marshal Massena did not think proper to attack the British army
in this stronghold, and occupied his time in reconnaissances and
demonstrations, until compelled, through want of provisions and
consequent sickness of his troops, to abandon his designs, and retire
to a position in his rear. This object he finally effected in a
masterly manner, in the night, between the 14th and 15th of November,
followed by the allied forces. Both armies thus evacuated positions
on which the attention of Europe had been fixed, and which they had
occupied for a month in presence of each other.

The division in which the six companies of the Seventy-first were
placed advanced by the route of Alemquer, Cartajo, Atataya, and
Almoster, and halted in and about the latter place from the 20th
to the 26th of November, inclusive. The enemy, in the mean time,
retired to an extremely strong position at and in the vicinity of
Santarem, where Marshal Massena halted, although threatened by
Viscount Wellington, who, after some manœuvring, took up a position
immediately in the enemy’s front, having his head-quarters at
Cartajo, and the different corps of the army in the villages. The
brigade to which the Seventy-first belonged occupied Alquintrinha.

[Sidenote: 1811.]

[Sidenote: 1st bat.]

At this place the Seventy-first remained in quarters until March,
1811, at which period the army, having been reinforced, was about to
resume the offensive, when the enemy retired during the night of the
5th of March, taking the same road, through Estremadura, by which he
entered Portugal.

The British army accordingly marched in pursuit of Marshal Massena,
and the brigade in which was the Seventy-first accompanied it,
moving by Redinha, Miranda de Corvo, and Saryedes, passing the
Coa, a little above Sabugal, upon the 5th of April, and on the 9th
arrived at Albergaria, a small town on the frontiers of Spain. The
Seventy-first remained in Albergaria until the 2nd of May, when the
enemy, having been strongly reinforced, moved off from Salamanca, and
on that day crossed the frontier with a large convoy of provisions
for Almeida, then closely invested by the Portuguese forces under
Brigadier-General Pack.

In consequence of this movement the allied army broke up its
cantonments on the Azava, and formed in order of battle upon the high
ground behind the Duas Casas, the left extending to the high road to
Almeida, which crossed the river by a ford near Fort Concepcion, and
the right keeping up a communication with the bridge at Sabugal;
opposite the centre the village of Fuentes d’Onor was strongly
occupied by light infantry.

Upon the 3rd of May the French took post on the opposite side of the
valley of the Duas Casas, their left fronting Fuentes d’Onor, and
their right extending about two miles and a half to Almeida. In the
afternoon of the 3rd of May they attacked Fuentes d’Onor with much
vigour. That post was defended with the greatest bravery, until the
light companies, being worn out and harassed by repeated attacks,
were obliged to retire, and the enemy possessed himself of the lower
part of the village.

The Seventy-first was now ordered up in support, and, commanded
by Lieut.-Colonel the Honourable Henry Cadogan, charged the enemy
through the village and across the Duas Casas, taking ten officers
and about a hundred men prisoners. The corps retained its conquest
that night and the whole of the next day, but upon Sunday, the 5th
of May, the French having succeeded in turning some troops to the
immediate right, was obliged to give way; but having been promptly
supported by the Seventy-fourth and Eighty-eighth Regiments, it again
advanced, took possession of and retained the village until the
conclusion of the action.

A struggle of such duration could not be carried on without great
loss, and the Seventy-first suffered severely. It went into action
about 320 strong, and lost nearly one-half of its number in killed
and wounded.

The Seventy-first had Lieutenants John Conseil, William Houston, and
John Graham, and Ensign Donald John Kearns, together with 4 sergeants
and 22 rank and file killed. Captains Peter Adamson and James
M^cIntyre, Lieutenants William M^cCraw, Humphrey Fox, and Robert Law
(Adjutant), Ensigns Charles Cox, John Vandeleur, and Carique Lewin,
6 sergeants, 3 buglers, and 100 rank and file, were wounded. 2
officers, with several men, were taken prisoners.

In commemoration of the gallantry displayed in this prolonged action,
the Seventy-first subsequently received the royal authority to bear
the words “Fuentes d’Onor” on the regimental colour and appointments.

The following letter from Lord Fitzroy Somerset will serve to show
the opinion entertained by Lord Wellington of the conduct of the
Seventy-first on this occasion.

                                      “_Villa Formosa, 8th May, 1811._

  “Sir,

  “Lord Wellington being highly gratified with the conduct of the
  Seventy-first Regiment, has directed me to request that you will
  transmit to me the name of a non-commissioned officer who may be
  eligible for a commission, in order that his Lordship may recommend
  him for an Ensigncy on the present occasion.

                                  “I have the honour to be, Sir,
                                          “Your most obedient servant,
                                                    “FITZROY SOMERSET.

  “_Lieut.-Colonel
      “The Honourable Henry Cadogan,
          “Seventy-first Regiment._”

According to his Lordship’s recommendation, Quartermaster-Sergeant
William Gavin was shortly afterwards promoted to an ensigncy in the
regiment.

The Seventy-first upon the 14th returned to their old quarters at
Albergaria, and remained there until the 26th of May, when the
brigade was ordered to the Alemtejo frontier, as a reinforcement to
Marshal Sir William Beresford’s army, at this time besieging Badajoz,
and threatened by the advance of Marshal Soult from the south of
Spain.

[Sidenote: 2nd bat.]

On the 15th of May, 1811, the second battalion embarked at Leith for
South Britain, arrived at Ramsgate on the 23rd of that month, and
remained stationed in England for nearly two years.

[Sidenote: 1st bat.]

The first battalion, upon its route southward, crossed the Tagus on
the 31st of May, and arrived near Albuhera on the 14th June, having
passed through Portalegre, Aronches, Campo Mayor, and Talavera Real.

The sanguinary battle of Albuhera, fought on the 16th of May, had
obliged Marshal Soult to retire previously to the arrival of the
reinforcements, which being considered no longer necessary, the
battalion retired to Elvas, where it remained two days, moving to
Toro de Moro on the 19th of June, where it remained for a month.
At this encampment a detachment of 350 men, with a proportion of
officers, joined from the second battalion then stationed at Deal.

About this period the first battalion became a part of the army,
under Lieut.-General Rowland (afterwards Viscount) Hill. The junction
of the armies of Marshals Marmont and Soult having obliged Viscount
Wellington to raise the siege of Badajoz, which had been resumed
after the battle of Albuhera, the battalion, in co-operation with
his Lordship’s retrograde movement, retired to Borba on 20th of
July. Here it remained until the 1st of September, when it moved to
Portalegre, and thence marched to Castello de Vido, on the 4th of
October.

A detachment from Marshal Soult’s army, under General Girard, having
been levying contributions in Spanish Estremadura, Lieut.-General
Rowland Hill, with a view of putting a stop to his movements, broke
up his cantonment at Portalegre, upon the 22nd of October, proceeding
by Albuquerque and Malpartida. On the 27th, when, within a moderate
march of the enemy at Arroyo-dos-Molinos, he halted his troops, and,
at night, breaking up his bivouac, made a flank movement close to the
road by which the French intended to march on the following morning.
In that position he awaited the approach of day, when on the 28th of
October, the British marched directly on the rear of the town with
such celerity that the cavalry pickets were attacked before they had
time to mount.

The French main body, though in the act of filing out, had so little
intimation of danger, that the officers and men were surrounded
before their formation was effected, and to seek safety they
individually dispersed. Many of them were killed, and about 1,400
were taken prisoners. All the enemy’s artillery and baggage were
captured. General Brun, and Colonel the Prince of Aremberg, together
with several other officers, were among the prisoners.

In this brilliant affair the Seventy-first was one of the three corps
that advanced through the centre of the town, and were, therefore,
principally engaged; but the enemy, from his complete surprise, being
unable to make a combined resistance, the British sustained but a
trifling loss.

The battalion subsequently returned to Portalegre, where it arrived
early in November. Although the Thirty-fourth Regiment was allowed to
inscribe the words, “Arroyo dos Molinos” on its colours, still, for
some inexplicable reason, the same privilege has always been refused
to the other regiments that were present at that action.

Lieut.-General Hill, on the 7th of November, issued the following
General Order:—

                                    “_Portalegre, 7th November, 1811._

  “Lieut.-General Hill has great satisfaction in congratulating the
  troops on the success which has attended their recent operations
  in Estremadura, and in so doing he cannot but endeavour to do
  justice to the merits of those through whose exertions it has been
  obtained. A patient, willing endurance of forced and night marches,
  during the worst of weather, and over bad roads, of bivouacs in wet
  weather, oftentimes without cover and without fire, and a strict
  observance of discipline, are qualities, however, common in British
  soldiers, which the Lieut.-General cannot pass unnoticed. Having on
  this occasion witnessed the exertion of them in no ordinary degree,
  he feels that nothing but the most zealous attention of commanding
  officers, the goodwill and zealous spirit of the non-commissioned
  officers and soldiers, could produce such an effect, and he
  requests they will, generally and individually, accept his warmest
  thanks, particularly those corps which were engaged in the action
  of Arroyo dos Molinos, whose silent attention to orders, when
  preparing to attack, and when manœuvring before the enemy, could
  not but excite his notice, and give them an additional claim on
  him.”

Letters from the Secretary of State, dated the 2nd, and from His
Royal Highness the Duke of York, Commander-in-Chief, dated the 6th
December, were promulgated, expressive of His Royal Highness the
Prince Regent’s approbation and thanks to Lieut.-General Hill, and
the troops under his command, for their brilliant operations on the
recent expedition in Spanish Estremadura, in having totally surprised
and defeated the enemy, under General Girard.

Viscount Wellington, having made preparations for the recapture
of Ciudad Rodrigo, concentrated the main body of the army in that
neighbourhood, and the troops, under Lieut.-General Hill, were
therefore ordered to divert the enemy’s attention in the south.

The first battalion of the Seventy-first remained at Portalegre,
until the 25th of December, when the brigade moved into Estremadura,
for the purpose of expelling the French, who were ravaging the
country. After the performance of this duty, the battalion returned
to its former quarters at Portalegre, in February, 1812.

[Sidenote: 1812.]

[Sidenote: 1st bat.]

Upon the 19th of March, 1812, the battalion moved northward
to Castello Branco, where it remained for about a week, and
afterwards returned for the last time to Portalegre. The Earl of
Wellington having made arrangements for the third siege of Badajoz,
Lieut.-General Sir Rowland Hill’s corps was destined to cover his
movements, and with that view proceeded on the 21st of March towards
Merida, and afterwards to Don Benito, where the troops remained for a
few days; but upon the approach of Marshal Soult with a large army,
with the intention of raising the siege, Lieutenant-General Hill
retired upon Albuhera, through Arroyo de San Servan and Talavera Real.

Badajoz having been assaulted and carried by the troops, under
the Earl of Wellington, on the night of the 6th of April, after a
sanguinary conflict, the movement of Marshal Soult was rendered
nugatory, and the troops under his orders retired into Andalusia.

Marshal Marmont, having, during the progress of the siege, penetrated
into the province of Beira, and threatened Ciudad Rodrigo and
Almeida, the Earl of Wellington, after the fall of Badajoz, crossed
the Tagus, leaving Sir Rowland Hill’s force to watch Marshal Soult,
which took post at Almendralejos for that purpose.

The battalion was stationed at this town, from the 13th of April
until the 11th of May. It having then become expedient to render the
communications between the French armies on the north and south of
the Tagus as precarious as possible, by the destruction of the bridge
of boats at Almaraz, the corps under Lieut.-General Sir Rowland Hill,
being the most disposable and convenient force, was accordingly
ordered on this important service.

The French, feeling the importance of this bridge to their mutual
strength and security, had surrounded it on both sides of the river
with formidable enclosed works, having in the interior of them
casemated and loop-holed towers. The troops appointed for these
strong works, consequently, anticipated an arduous struggle.

Upon the 12th of May the corps broke up from Almendralejos, and
marching by Truscillo and Jaraicejo, reached on the 18th of that
month the Sierra, 5 miles from Almaraz, on which stands the Castle
of Mirabete. This post was so strongly fortified that it blocked up
the only road to Almaraz for the passage of artillery, which was
considered by the enemy absolutely necessary for the destruction
of the works. Sir Rowland Hill thought otherwise, and ascertaining
that infantry could cross the Sierra by a track through Roman Gordo,
he left his artillery, and descended at night with a column of
2,000 men. The leading company arrived at dawn of day, close to the
principal fort, built on a height a few hundred yards in front of the
_tête de pont_, but such were the difficulties of the road, that a
considerable time elapsed before the rear closed, during which the
troops were fortunately sheltered by a ravine, unseen by the enemy.

On the 19th May the Fiftieth Regiment, and the left wing of the
Seventy-first, having been provided with ladders, were appointed to
escalade the works of Fort Napoleon, supported by the right wing of
the Seventy-first and the Ninety-second Regiment.

From a feint made upon Mirabete, the French were aware that an enemy
was in the neighbourhood. The garrison on the alert immediately
opened a heavy fire, and vigorously resisted the efforts made to push
up the escarp; but the moment the first men gained a footing on the
parapet, the enemy took to flight. The whole of this brilliant affair
was completed in the short space of 15 minutes, and with little loss.
The Seventy-first had Captain Lewis Grant, with 1 sergeant and 7 rank
and file killed; Lieutenants William Lockwood and Donald Ross, 3
sergeants, and 29 rank and file were wounded.

The names of 36 non-commissioned officers and soldiers of the
Seventy-first were inserted in regimental orders for conspicuous
bravery upon this occasion, and the Royal authority was subsequently
granted for the word “Almaraz,” to be borne on the regimental colour
and appointments.

The following orders were issued upon this occasion:—

                                 “_Bivouac, near Fort Napoleon,
                                                      19th May, 1812._

  “BRIGADE ORDER.

  “Major-General Howard cannot delay expressing his warmest
  acknowledgments to Lieut.-Colonel Stewart and Major Harrison, of
  the Fiftieth Regiment, and Major Cother, of the Seventy-first
  Regiment, who commanded the three columns of attack this morning
  on Fort Napoleon, and the works on the Tagus, for the gallant
  and distinguished manner in which they led the columns intrusted
  to them, as well as to all the other officers, non-commissioned
  officers, and privates, for their bravery and good conduct, which
  produced the brilliant result of the capture of the works in
  question.”


                                          “_Truxillo, May 22nd, 1812._

  “GENERAL ORDER.

  “Lieut.-General Sir Rowland Hill congratulates the troops on
  the success which has attended their exertions in the present
  expedition. Every object for which it was undertaken has been
  attained, and in the manner most desirable and effectual. It is
  highly gratifying to the Lieut.-General to report on this occasion
  his admiration of the discipline and the valour of the troops
  under his command. The chance of war gave to the Fiftieth and
  Seventy-first Regiments the most conspicuous share in these events,
  who nobly profited by the opportunity; but the Lieut.-General is
  satisfied that the same zeal and the same spirit would have been
  found in every corps if there had been occasion for bringing them
  into play.

  “The Lieut.-General has not failed to report to his Excellency the
  Commander of the Forces the particulars of this brilliant service,
  and the good conduct of all those concerned in it. He will,
  therefore, not say more at present than to express his warmest
  thanks for the assistance which he has received from all ranks; and
  he is confident, when it shall again be his good fortune to lead
  them against the enemy, he shall have to report conduct equally
  honourable to them and equally advantageous to their country.”

The following is an extract from Lieut.-General Sir Rowland Hill’s
despatch to Lord Wellington:—

  “I cannot sufficiently praise the conduct of the Fiftieth and
  Seventy-first Regiments to whom the assaults fell, the constant
  steady manner in which they formed and advanced and carried the
  place was worthy of those distinguished corps and the officers who
  led them.”

The bridge and works in the neighbourhood of Almaraz having been
completely destroyed, the Seventy-first returned to Truxillo, where
they remained a few days, then moved to Merida, and afterwards
to Almendralejos. Lieut.-General Sir Rowland Hill’s force having
received orders to make a diversion in the south, while the main army
was moving northward on Salamanca, the battalion again moved from
Almendralejos to the borders of Andalusia, through Llerena. On this
march, the advanced parties of cavalry were constantly skirmishing
with the enemy, but the Seventy-first was not engaged.

From Llerena the battalion returned to Zafra, whence, after a short
halt, it proceeded to Villa Franca, and finally to Don Benito. In
these marches through Estremadura, the weather was oppressively hot,
and, joined to the clouds of dust raised by the troops, was so
fatiguing that it was considered expedient at one time to move by
night, and thus these inconveniences were alleviated.

While the force under Lieut.-General Sir Rowland Hill had been thus
employed, the allied army, under the Earl of Wellington, had gained a
victory on the 22nd of July over the French at Salamanca, for which
he was advanced to the dignity of Marquis.

From Don Benito, the battalion moved upon the 13th of September, and
passing through Truxillo, Talavera, and Toledo, arrived at Aranjuez
upon the 1st of October, from which place, after a halt of three
weeks, it moved to Ponte Duenna, further up the Tagus.

The sudden approach of the united armies of Marshals Soult and Suchet
rendered a speedy retreat necessary, and the division accordingly
retired from Ponte Duenna in the night of the 28th of October, moving
to form a junction with the army of the Marquis of Wellington, who
had now relinquished the siege of Burgos. Near Madrid, the division
halted for a short period, when, being joined by the garrison of that
city, the troops retired leisurely by the Guadarama Pass on Alba de
Tormes. This town, the Seventy-first occupied from the 7th to the
13th of November, and during that period sustained a loss in action
with the enemy of 1 sergeant and 6 rank and file killed; 1 bugler and
5 rank and file wounded.

The army having received orders to retire on Portugal, the battalion
abandoned this post, arriving at Coria upon the 1st of December,
where the retreat terminated. In this quarter, the Seventy-first
continued until the 13th of December, at which time they were pushed
forward to Puerto de Bannos, where they were joined by a draft of 150
men from the second battalion.

[Sidenote: 1813.]

While stationed at this post, an attempt was made, in February, 1813,
by the French, to surprise Bejar, then occupied by the Fiftieth
regiment. The Seventy-first were ordered forward to support, but
previously to their arrival that brave regiment had driven back the
enemy and completely foiled his efforts.

[Sidenote: 2nd bat.]

On the 18th of March, 1813, the second battalion of the Seventy-first
embarked at Gravesend for North Britain, and arrived at Leith on the
23rd of that month.

[Sidenote: 1st bat.]

Upon the 5th of April, the Seventy-first changed quarters with the
Fiftieth regiment, and continued to occupy Bejar until the 21st of
May, at which period the army broke up from its winter quarters for
active operations. The battalion on its advance moved by Salamanca
and Toro, and encamped at La Puebla on the 20th of June, the evening
before the memorable battle of Vittoria.

Upon the morning of the 21st of June, the two armies being in
position, the Seventy-first was ordered to ascend the heights of La
Puebla, to support the Spanish forces under General Morillo. They
accordingly advanced in open column, and having formed line, were
immediately hotly engaged with the enemy, and upon this occasion
suffered an irreparable loss in the fall of their Commanding Officer
the Honourable Colonel Henry Cadogan, who fell mortally wounded while
leading his men to the charge, and being unable to accompany the
battalion, requested to be carried to a neighbouring eminence, from
which he might take a last farewell of them and the field. In his
dying moments, he earnestly inquired if the French were beaten, and
on being told by an officer of the regiment who stood by supporting
him, that they had given way at all points, he ejaculated, “God bless
my brave countrymen,” and immediately expired.

While recording the deep sense of sorrow which the Seventy-first
experienced in the loss of a commanding officer who had so often
fought at their head, and whose devoted gallantry had so frequently
called forth their admiration, it is but a meet tribute to the
memory of that brave officer to extract from the despatch of the
Marquis of Wellington the following expressions of his Lordship’s
regret at his loss:

  “And I am concerned to report that the Honourable Lieut.-Colonel
  Cadogan has died of a wound which he received. In him His Majesty
  has lost an officer of great zeal and tried gallantry, who had
  already acquired the respect and regard of the whole profession,
  and of whom it might be expected that if he had lived he would have
  rendered the most important services to his country.”

After the fall of the Lieut.-Colonel, the Seventy-first continued
advancing, and driving the enemy from the heights, until the force
which was opposed to them became so unequal, and the loss of
the battalion so severe, that it was obliged to retire upon the
remainder of the brigade. In the performance of this arduous duty,
the battalion suffered very severely, having had 1 field officer, 1
captain, 2 lieutenants, 6 sergeants, 1 bugler, and 78 rank and file
killed; 1 field officer, 3 captains, 7 lieutenants, 13 sergeants, 2
buglers, and 255 rank and file were wounded.

The officers killed were Colonel the Honourable Henry Cadogan,
Captain Henry Hall, Lieutenants Humphrey Fox and Colin Mackenzie.
Those wounded were Brevet Lieut.-Colonel Charles Cother, Captains
Samuel Reed, Joseph Thomas Pidgeon, William Alexander Grant,
Lieutenants Alexander Duff, Loftus Richards, John McIntyre, Charles
Cox, William Torriano, Norman Campbell, and Thomas Commeline.

Lieut.-General Sir William Stuart, on subsequently receiving the
thanks of the House of Commons for his gallantry at Vittoria, thus
recorded the bravery of this regiment on that day, in the course of
his answer to the Speaker:—

  “I cannot advert to that battle and not submit to the memory,
  and, if I may use the term, to the affection of this House the
  name of one gallant officer upon whom the brunt of this contest
  particularly fell—I mean, Sir, the late Colonel Cadogan; the fall
  of that officer was glorious, as his last moments were marked by
  the success of a favourite regiment upon the magnanimity of whose
  conduct he kept his eyes fixed during the expiring hour of a
  well-finished life.”

On this occasion the French suffered a great loss of men, together
with all their artillery, baggage, and stores. King Joseph, whose
carriage and court equipage were seized, had barely time to escape
on horseback. The defeat was the most complete that the French had
sustained in the Peninsula. It was this victory which gained a bâton
for the Marquis of Wellington, who was appointed a Field-Marshal. In
a most flattering letter, the Prince Regent, in the name and behalf
of His Majesty, thus conferred the honour:—

  “You have sent me among the trophies of your unrivalled fame
  the staff of a French Marshal, and I send you in return that of
  England.” This was in allusion to the bâton of Marshal Jourdon,
  which was taken by the Eighty-seventh Regiment at Vittoria.

The Seventy-first subsequently received the Royal authority to bear
the word “Vittoria” on the regimental colour and appointments, in
commemoration of this signal victory.

When the Seventy-first paraded on the morning of the 22nd of June,
the dreadful havoc made by the action of the preceding day became
painfully manifest, and an universal gloom was thrown over all, at
missing from their ranks nearly 400 brave comrades who had been
either killed or wounded on the heights of La Puebla.

The enemy having been completely beaten at all points was forced to
retreat in confusion on Pampeluna, and the British army immediately
followed in pursuit. The battalion in this advance arrived at
Pampeluna on the 29th of June, and shortly afterwards followed, as
part of Sir Rowland Hill’s army, a large force of the enemy, who were
retreating into France by the valley of Bastan. During this forward
movement the Seventy-first had some skirmishing in the valley of
Elizondo, but without loss. Upon the 8th of July the Seventy-first
arrived at the heights of Maya, from whence, for the first time, they
had the cheering prospect of beholding the empire of France extended
under them in all its fertile beauty. Joy was diffused through every
heart: every trial and danger was forgotten while viewing this
splendid and gratifying sight. Upon these heights the battalion was
encamped until the 25th of July.

Marshal Soult having been selected by Napoleon for the command of the
French army in Spain, with the rank of “Lieutenant of the Emperor,”
that officer used the most active exertions for its re-organization,
and made immediate arrangements for forcing the British position in
the Pyrenees. With this view he advanced in person with a large force
against the right, stationed at Roncesvalles, and detached Count
D’Erlon with about 13,000 men to attack the position of Maya.

The Count D’Erlon, upon the 25th of July, advanced against the right
of the Maya heights, where the ridges of the mountains branched
off towards his camp. The force at this point was not sufficient
to resist such formidable numbers, and the reserve being posted at
some distance to watch passes of importance, which could not be
left wholly unguarded, was brought up by battalions as the pressure
increased.

The intrepidity with which these attacks were met, and the obstinate
bravery with which every inch of ground was disputed, were obliged
at last to yield to overwhelming numbers; but although the troops
were forced to retrograde, yet in their retreat they took advantage
of every rising ground, and disputed it with the utmost tenacity.
At the commencement of this attack a part of the first battalion of
the Seventy-first Regiment was detached to a neighbouring high peak,
under the command of Major William Fitzgerald of the Eighty-second
Regiment, and was strengthened by a company of that corps.
Lieut.-General the Honourable Sir William Stewart, in his report to
Lieut.-General Sir Rowland Hill, thus expressed himself respecting
these men:—“I cannot too warmly praise the conduct of that field
officer (Major Fitzgerald) and that of his brave detachment. They
maintained the position to the last, and were compelled, from the
want of ammunition, to impede the enemy’s occupation of the rock by
hurling stones at them.”

In another part of this communication, the Lieut.-General thus
alluded to the Eighty-second Regiment and to the first brigade,
which was composed of the Fiftieth, Seventy-first, and Ninety-second
Regiments:—

  “I feel it my duty to recommend to your attention, and favourable
  report to the Commander of the Forces, the conduct and spirit of
  Colonel Grant, and of his brave corps, the Eighty-second Regiment;
  also the whole of the first brigade, than which His Majesty’s army
  possesses not men of more proved discipline and courage. The wounds
  of him, and every commanding officer in that brigade, were attended
  with circumstances of peculiar honour to each of them, and to those
  under their orders.”

The following is a list of the killed and wounded in the action of
the 25th of July, as nearly as could be ascertained:—

3 sergeants and 54 rank and file killed; 6 sergeants, 1 bugler, and
76 rank and file wounded.

The Seventy-first continued retiring until the 30th, when
Lieut.-General Sir Rowland Hill took up a strong position beyond
Lizasso. In this post he was attacked with much spirit by the enemy,
who at the same time, by manœuvring on the left flank, rendered
necessary a change of position to a range of heights near Eguaros,
which all the efforts of the French failed to carry. Upon this
occasion the Seventy-first was seriously engaged, and had 1 sergeant
and 23 rank and file killed; 2 sergeants, 1 bugler, and 33 rank and
file were wounded.

The enemy having been foiled in all the objects of his attack found
it necessary, in his turn, to retreat, moving on the 31st of July by
the pass of Doña Maria, where he left a strong corps in an excellent
position. This force was immediately attacked by the columns of
Lieut.-Generals Sir Rowland Hill and the Earl of Dalhousie, and
dislodged after a gallant resistance. In the action of this day
the first brigade, consisting of the Fiftieth, Seventy-first, and
Ninety-second Regiments, had the honour of bearing its share and of
distinguishing itself. The Seventy-first had 1 sergeant and 29 rank
and file killed; 2 sergeants and 45 rank and file were wounded.

The battalion now returned to the heights of Maya, from whence, after
a halt of a few days, it moved to Roncesvalles.

Previously to this change of quarters, an order was issued by
Lieut.-General Sir Rowland Hill, relative to the conduct of the
troops in the actions of the Pyrenees, of which the following is a
copy:—

                                          “_Arrizi, August 3rd, 1813._

  “GENERAL ORDER.

  “Lieut.-General Sir Rowland Hill requests that the officers,
  non-commissioned officers, and privates of the corps of the army
  under his command will accept his best thanks for the gallant
  conduct they have displayed during the late active and interesting
  operations.

  “The chance of service has placed the troops under his command in
  situations where they were exposed to an immense superiority of
  forces, a circumstance unavoidable in operations so extensive as
  those in which this army has been engaged; and it has at all times
  been necessary to cede ground to the enemy. The Lieut.-General,
  however, has the satisfaction of knowing that the troops have on
  every occasion maintained their high character; that they have only
  withdrawn from their positions by superior orders, and then it has
  been invariably attended with circumstances highly creditable to
  them. The Lieut.-General has not failed to report to the Commander
  of the Forces the details of the several affairs in which the
  corps have been engaged, and he knows that their services are duly
  appreciated by his Excellency.”

The Royal authority was subsequently granted to the Seventy-first to
bear the word “Pyrenees” on the regimental colour and appointments,
in commemoration of the services of the first battalion in the
actions of the 25th, 30th, and 31st of July, which have been
designated the “_Battles of the Pyrenees_.”

In these actions the Seventy-first had Lieutenant Alexander Duff
killed, Major Maxwell Mackenzie, Captains Leslie Walker and Alexander
Grant, Lieutenants Thomas Park, John Roberts, William Woolcombe,
William Peacocke, and Anthony Pack, wounded.

The following “Morning Reports” of the 14th of June and 7th of
August, the former being prior to the battle of Vittoria, and the
latter a few days subsequent to the actions in the Pyrenees, will
show how the ranks of the Seventy-first were thinned within a period
of less than two months:—

                                 Sergeants.  Buglers.  Rank and File.
  14th June, 1813, present
      and fit for duty              54          21        909
  7th August, 1813, ditto           21          15        356
                                    --          --        ---
      Decrease                      33           6        553

For nearly three months the battalion was encamped on the heights of
Roncesvalles, during which period St. Sebastian and Pampeluna were
captured. The men were principally employed during this interval in
the construction of block houses and batteries, and the formation of
roads for the artillery.

In the early part of the season the neighbouring heights of Altobispo
were occupied weekly by the brigades of the division; but as the
cold increased with the high winds, the pickets alone were appointed
for this duty. Such was the inclemency of the weather, and natural
advantages of this position, that it was scarcely thought that
the enemy would attempt an attack. This opinion, however, was ill
founded, as upon the night of the 11th of October an attempt was
made by a strong party upon the advance, composed of 15 men of the
Seventy-first, under Sergeant James Ross. Instead of flinching from
an unequal contest, this small band, relying upon the strength of
the position, and being, moreover, favoured by the darkness, which
concealed its strength, maintained its ground, and forced the enemy
to retire. The bravery of this party called forth high praise from
Lieut.-General the Honourable Sir William Stewart, commanding the
division, and at his request the soldiers composing it were all
presented with medals.

On the 8th of November the division was again in motion, for the
purpose of entering the French territory; and on the 9th of that
month it bivouacked near the heights of Maya, where orders were
received to march as light as possible. The heights were passed that
night by moonlight for the purpose of joining the grand army; but the
march over bad roads was so fatiguing that when the brigade arrived
in position on the Nivelle it was not called upon to take an active
part in the glorious proceedings of the rest of the army on the 10th
of November, in forcing the French from their fortified position on
that river.

After the battle of the Nivelle, the battalion marched in the
direction of Cambo, on the Nive, where some smart skirmishing
occurred, in which 2 men were killed, and 4 sergeants, 1 bugler, and
41 rank and file wounded. When the French crossed to the right bank,
the Seventy-first occupied part of the town of Cambo.

The battalion remained in Cambo for nearly a month, and was here
joined by a detachment of 4 sergeants and 82 rank and file, under the
command of Lieut. Charles Henderson, from the second battalion, at
this period stationed at Glasgow.

On the 9th of December the first battalion was engaged in the passage
of the Nive. The left wing of the Seventy-first entered the river,
supported by the fire of the right, and reached the opposite bank
without experiencing any loss.

The enemy now retired within Bayonne, and the corps of Lieut.-General
Sir Rowland Hill was established with its right on the Adour, the
left above the Nive, and the centre at St. Pierre, across the high
road to St. Jean Pied-de-Port.

In this disposition the second division, of which the Seventy-first
formed part, was placed at St. Pierre. Marshal Soult, having
completely failed in an attempt which he made against the left of
the army, moved with his whole force against Sir Rowland Hill’s
corps, with the expectation of overwhelming him before he could be
supported.

The enemy came on with great boldness upon the 13th of December,
and made vigorous efforts against the centre, which he repeatedly
attacked; but at last, finding his most earnest endeavours fruitless,
he drew off. In the action of this day the loss of the first
battalion of the Seventy-first was very severe, having been placed
close to the main road, against which the French made such formidable
and repeated attacks.

Brevet Lieut.-Colonel Maxwell Mackenzie and Lieutenants William
Campbell and Charles Henderson, together with 2 sergeants, 1 bugler,
and 23 rank and file, were killed. Captains Robert Barclay and
William Alexander Grant, and Lieutenants John M^cIntyre and William
Torriano, with 37 rank and file, were wounded.

The following short, but highly expressive Division Order was issued
by Lieut.-General the Honourable Sir William Stewart, K.B.

                                “_Head-quarters, near Petite Moguerre,
                                         “December 14th, 1813._

  “The second division has greatly distinguished itself, and its
  gallantry in yesterday’s action is avowed by the Commander of the
  Forces and the Allied Army.”

In commemoration of these services, the Seventy-first subsequently
received the royal authority to bear the word “Nive” on the
regimental colour and appointments.

The battalion marched on the 19th of December to Urcuit, and to Urt
upon the 28th of that month. A small picket of the Seventy-first,
under the command of Corporal Dogherty, here distinguished itself by
beating off an enemy’s party of nearly treble its strength.

[Sidenote: 1814.]

While stationed in this quarter, the companies were frequently
engaged in skirmishes with the enemy, particularly at St. Hellette,
heights of Garris, and St. Palais, in the month of January, 1814.

In the beginning of February the battalion marched from Urt, and
during its advance had frequent skirmishes with the enemy’s rear
guard.

On the 26th of February the battalion was in action at Sauveterre,
and upon the 27th had the honour of participating in the battle of
Orthes.

In commemoration of this victory, the Seventy-first afterwards
received the royal authority to bear the word “Orthes” on the
regimental colour and appointments.

Two divisions of the French army having retired to Aire after the
action of the 27th of February, Lieut.-General Sir Rowland Hill moved
upon that town to dislodge them. Upon the 2nd of March the French
were found strongly posted upon a ridge of hills, extending across
the great road in front of the town, having their right on the Adour.
The second division attacked them along the road, seconded by a
Portuguese brigade, and drove them from their position. Lieut. James
Anderson and 17 rank and file were killed; Lieut. Henry Frederick
Lockyer, 1 sergeant, and 19 rank and file were wounded.

A detachment from the second battalion, consisting of 1 captain, 4
subalterns, and 134 rank and file, under the command of Major Arthur
Jones, joined at Aire.

On the 25th of March, part of the battalion was engaged in an
affair at Tarbes, in which Lieutenant Robert Law was wounded, and
upon the 10th of April was in position at Toulouse, where some of
the companies were employed skirmishing, and sustained a loss of 1
sergeant and 3 rank and file killed; 6 rank and file were wounded.

During the night of the 11th of April, the French troops evacuated
Toulouse, and a white flag was hoisted. On the following day, the
Marquis of Wellington entered the city, amidst the acclamations of
the inhabitants. In the course of the afternoon of the 13th of April,
intelligence was received of the abdication of Napoleon, and had not
the express been delayed on the journey by the French police, the
sacrifice of many valuable lives would have been prevented.

A disbelief in the truth of this intelligence occasioned much
unnecessary bloodshed at Bayonne, the garrison of which made a
desperate sortie on the 14th of April, and Lieutenant Sir John Hope
(afterwards Earl of Hopetoun) was taken prisoner. Major-General
Andrew Hay was killed, and Major-General Stopford was wounded.

A treaty of peace was established between Great Britain and France;
Louis XVIII was restored to the throne of France, and Napoleon
Bonaparte was permitted to reside at Elba, the sovereignty of that
island having been conceded to him by the Allied Powers.

The war being ended, the first battalion of the Seventy-first
regiment marched from Toulouse to Blanchfort, where it was encamped
for 16 days, and afterwards proceeded to Pouillac, where it embarked
on the 15th of July for England, on board of His Majesty’s ship
“Sultan” of seventy-four guns.

Prior to the breaking up of the Peninsula army, the Duke of
Wellington issued the following General Order:—

                                         “_Bordeaux, 14th June, 1814._

  “GENERAL ORDER.

  “The Commander of the Forces, being upon the point of returning to
  England, again takes this opportunity of congratulating the army
  upon the recent events which have restored peace to their country
  and to the world.

  “The share which the British army have had in producing those
  events, and the high character with which the army will quit this
  country, must be equally satisfactory to every individual belonging
  to it, as they are to the Commander of the Forces, and he trusts
  that the troops will continue the same good conduct to the last.

  “The Commander of the Forces once more requests the army to accept
  his thanks.

  “Although circumstances may alter the relations in which he has
  stood towards them for some years so much to his satisfaction, he
  assures them he will never cease to feel the warmest interest in
  their welfare and honour, and that he will be at all times happy
  to be of any service to those to whose conduct, discipline, and
  gallantry their country is so much indebted.”

In addition to the other distinctions acquired during the war
in Spain, Portugal, and the South of France, the Seventy-first
subsequently received the Royal Authority to bear the word
“Peninsula” on the regimental colours and appointments.

The first battalion arrived at Cork on the 28th of July, and marched
to Mallow, where it remained for a few days. On the 4th of August,
the battalion marched to Limerick, where Colonel Reynell assumed
command of it in December, and in which city it continued to be
quartered during the remainder of the year.

[Sidenote: 2nd bat.]

The second battalion remained stationed in North Britain.

[Sidenote: 1815.]

[Sidenote: 1st bat.]

In January, 1815, the first battalion of the Seventy-first regiment
marched from Limerick to Cork, and embarked as part of an expedition
under orders for North America. Peace having been concluded with the
United States, and contrary winds having prevented the sailing of the
vessels, the destination of the battalion was changed, and subsequent
events occasioned its being employed against its former opponents.
The tranquillity which Europe appeared to have gained by the splendid
successes over the French in the Peninsula was again to be disturbed.
Napoleon, who had been accustomed to imperial sway, was naturally
discontented with his small sovereignty of Elba. Besides, the
correspondence kept up by him with his adherents in France, gave him
hopes of regaining his former power, which were, for a short time,
fully realised. He landed at Cannes in Provence, on the 1st of March,
1815, with a small body of men, and on the 20th of that month entered
Paris at the head of an army which had joined him on the road. This
could not be wondered at, for the officers and soldiers had won their
fame under his command, and gladly welcomed their former leader,
under whom they probably expected to acquire fresh honours, which
might erase the memory of the defeats sustained in the Peninsula.

Louis XVIII, unable to stem the torrent, withdrew from Paris to
Ghent, and Napoleon resumed his former dignity of Emperor of
the French. This assumption the Allied Powers determined not to
acknowledge, but resolved to deprive him of his sovereignty, and
again restore the ancient dynasty.

The first battalion of the Seventy-first, in consequence of these
occurrences, proceeded to the Downs, and was there embarked on board
small vessels, which conveyed it to Ostend, where it disembarked on
the 22nd of April.

The battalion next proceeded to Ghent, and, after remaining
there a week, marched to Leuze, between Ath and Fournay, and was
subsequently placed in the light brigade with the first battalion
of the Fifty-second, six companies of the second, and two companies
of the third battalion of the Ninety-fifth Regiment (Rifles), under
the command of Major-General Frederick Adam, in the division of
Lieut.-General Sir Henry Clinton.

The strength of the brigade was as follows:—

                                Rank and File.
  52nd Regt.   1st bat.             997
  71st do.       do.                788
  95th do.     2nd bat. Rifles      571
  95th do.     3rd do.    do.       185
                                  -----
                Total             2,541

Brevet Colonel Reynell, afterwards Lieut.-General Sir Thomas Reynell,
commanded the battalion at this period.

Napoleon resolved on attacking the Allies before their forces had
been fully collected, and by well-marked and admirably combined
movements, a portion of his army was concentrated, on the 14th of
June, between the Sambre and the Meuse.

On the morning of the 16th of June, as the battalion was proceeding
to the usual exercising-ground of the brigade at Leuze, it received
orders for an immediate advance upon Nivelles, where it arrived late
that night. On the same day, Prince Blücher had been attacked at
Ligny, and was forced to retreat to Havre. The Duke of Wellington
and a portion of his army had been also attacked at Quatre Bras
by Marshal Ney, who, however, made no impression upon the British
position.

In the course of the morning of the 17th of June, the Duke of
Wellington made a retrograde movement upon Waterloo, in order to keep
up his communication with the Prussians. At day-break on the same
morning, the first battalion of the Seventy-first retired, and took
up its position, with the rest of the allied army, on the plains in
the neighbourhood of Waterloo, being situated to the left and rear of
Hougomont.

The Seventy-first, with the rest of the army, bivouacked in position
during the night of the 17th of June, drenched by the rain, which
fell heavily. Upon the morning of the memorable 18th of June, the
battalion stood in open column, and in this situation was exposed
for some time to a heavy fire of artillery, but a judicious movement
to a short distance alleviated in a great measure this annoyance.
Line was next formed, and about two o’clock the battalion, with the
rest of the brigade, advanced, met their opponents in position,
charged, and instantly overthrew them.

A heavy fire now commenced upon the retreating enemy, but the
alignment having been completely deranged by the impetuosity of the
advance, Colonel Reynell, with his usual coolness, proceeded to
restore order, and had just completed the dressing of the line when
the French cavalry was seen advancing. Square was instantly formed,
and the Seventy-first, with the rest of the brigade, sustained a
charge from 3 regiments of French cavalry, namely, 1 of cuirassiers,
1 of grenadiers-à-cheval, and 1 of lancers.

The charge was made with the most obstinate bravery, but nothing
could overcome the steadiness of the British infantry, and after a
destructive loss, the French were forced to retire. At this moment
a piper played up the Seventy-first quick march, followed with the
charge. Major-General Adams with the regiment exclaimed, “Well done,
Seventy-first; you are all lions together, and as for you, piper, you
are an honour to your country. Forward, my lads, and give them the
charge in style, as I know and see you can do.”

Previously to this advance of the enemy’s cavalry the square of the
Seventy-first was struck by a round shot, which killed or wounded an
officer and 18 men of the eighth company.

About seven o’clock in the evening the left wing of the battalion
was formed in rear of the right, and while thus placed was, with the
rest of the division, attacked by a column of the Imperial Young
Guard, which had been kept in reserve during the day. It was allowed
to approach close without molestation, when the regiments, throwing
in a close and well-directed fire, prevented its deployment, and it
retired in confusion.

The enemy having now exhausted all its efforts, the British, in their
turn, advanced. The Seventy-first, in the first instance, suffered
much from the fire of some guns that enfiladed its front; these were
soon silenced, and the battalion was afterwards left unmolested. In
this advance the light brigade captured several guns. Night closed
in fast, and the corps rested after this lengthened and sanguinary
encounter, the pursuit of the discomfited enemy being committed to
the Prussians, under Marshal Blücher, who had arrived on the field of
battle in time to decide the defeat of the French.

The Seventy-first had Brevet Major Edmund L’Estrange (Aide-de-Camp to
Major-General Sir Denis Pack, K.C.B.), and Ensign John Todd, killed.
The following officers were wounded: the Lieut.-Colonel commanding
the battalion, Colonel Thomas Reynell; Brevet Lieut.-Colonel Arthur
Jones; Captains Samuel Reed, Donald Campbell, William Alexander
Grant, James Henderson, and Brevet Major Charles Johnstone;
Lieutenants Joseph Barrallier, Robert Lind, John Roberts, James
Coates, Robert Law, Carique Lewin, and Lieutenant and Adjutant
William Anderson.

The number of serjeants, buglers, and rank and file killed amounted
to 29; 166 were wounded, of whom 36 died of their wounds.

The following were present with the regiment at this battle:—

  _Colonel_, Lieut.-Colonel J. Reynell.
  _Lieut.-Colonel_, Major A. Jones.
  _Major_, L. Walker.

_Captains._

  S. Reed.
  J. T. Pidgeon.
  A. Armstrong.
  D. Campbell.
  William A. Grant.
  J. Henderson.
  A. T. M. McIntyre.
  C. Johnstone.
  Alex. Grant.

_Lieutenants._

  J. Barrallier.
  L. Richards.
  J. R. Elwes.
  C. Stewart.
  R. Baldwin.
  W. C. Hanson.
  Robert Lind.
  J. Roberts.
  James Coates.
  James Fraser.
  E. Gilborne.
  J. Whitney.
  William Long.
  Robert Law.
  C. J. Cox.
  Carique Lewin.
  William Woolcombe.
  William Torriano.
  G. W. Horton.
  J. Coote.
  C. Moorhead.
  D. Soutar.
  N. Campbell.

_Ensigns._

  A. Moffatt.
  W. P. Smith.
  H. W. Thompors.
  J. Barnett.
  A. M. Henderson.
  J. Spalding.
  J. Impitt.
  R. L’Estrange.

  _Paymaster_, H. McKenzie.
  _Adjutant_, William Anderson.
  _Surgeon_, A. Stewart.

_Assistant Surgeons._

  J. Winterscale.
  Samuel Hill.

Both Houses of Parliament, with the greatest enthusiasm, voted their
thanks to the army for its “distinguished valour at Waterloo.”

For the share which the battalion had in this glorious victory, the
Seventy-first were permitted to bear, in common with the rest of
the army engaged upon the 18th of June, the word “Waterloo” on the
regimental colour and appointments. Colonel Thomas Reynell and Major
L. Walker were appointed Companions of the Bath. The officers and
men engaged were presented with silver medals by His Royal Highness
the Prince Regent, and were allowed to reckon two years additional
service.

The battalion, with the rest of the army, afterwards marched towards
Paris, and entered that city on the 7th of July. The brigade encamped
that day on the Champs Elysées, near the Place Louis Quinze,
being the only British troops quartered within the barriers, and
continued there until the beginning of November, when it proceeded to
Versailles, and to Viarmes in December.

Meanwhile Louis XVIII had entered Paris and was again reinstated on
the throne of his ancestors. Napoleon Bonaparte had surrendered to
Captain Maitland, commanding the “Bellerophon,” British ship of war,
and the island of St. Helena having been fixed for his residence, he
was conveyed thither with a few of his devoted followers.

In Edinburgh, on the 26th of July, at the annual competition for
prizes given by the Highland Society of London, Sir John Sinclair,
President of the Judges, in the course of his address referred to
several instances where the sound of the bagpipes had been productive
of the most decisive results, and stated that it had been used with
the same effect in the late glorious conflicts, as appeared by
letters from the army. He said that before he obeyed the directions
of the Committee in delivering the prizes it was necessary to state
that George Clark, piper-major to the Seventy-first Regiment, having
formerly received a pipe from the Highland Society of Scotland for
his gallant conduct at the battle of Vimiera in continuing to play
upon his pipes after he was severely wounded, it was thought proper
to vote him a gold medal instead of considering him as a candidate
for one of the prizes.

[Sidenote: 2nd bat.]

On the 24th of December, 1815, the second battalion of the
Seventy-first was disbanded at Glasgow, the effective officers and
men being transferred to the first battalion.

[Sidenote: 1816.]

In January, 1816, the Seventy-first marched to the Pas-de-Calais, in
which part of France the regiment was quartered in several villages,
having its head-quarters at Norrent Fonte, a village on the high road
from Calais to Douay.

On the 21st of June, 1816, the regiment assembled on the bruyère of
Rombly, between the villages of Lingham and Rombly on the one side,
and Viterness and Leitre on the other, for the purpose of receiving
the medals which had been granted by His Royal Highness the Prince
Regent to the officers, non-commissioned officers, buglers, and
privates, for their services at the battle of Waterloo.

A hollow square upon the centre was formed on this occasion; the
ranks were opened, and the boxes containing the medals were placed
within the square. Colonel Reynell then addressed the regiment in the
following manner:—

  “Seventy-first!!

  “The deep interest, which you will all give me credit for feeling,
  in everything that affects the corps cannot fail to be awakened
  upon an occasion such as the present, when holding in my hands,
  to transfer to yours, these honourable rewards bestowed by your
  Sovereign for your share in the great and glorious exertions of
  the army of His Grace the Duke of Wellington upon the field of
  Waterloo, when the utmost efforts of the army of France, directed
  by Napoleon, reputed to be the first captain of the age, were not
  only paralyzed at the moment, but blasted beyond the power of even
  a second struggle.

  “To have participated in a contest crowned with victory so
  decisive, and productive of consequences that have diffused peace,
  security, and happiness throughout Europe, may be to each of you
  a source of honourable pride, as well as of gratitude to the
  Omnipotent Arbiter of all human contests, who preserved you in such
  peril, and without whose protecting hand the battle belongs not to
  the strong, nor the race to the swift.

  “I acknowledge to feel an honest and, I trust, an excusable,
  exultation, in having had the honour to command you on that day,
  and in dispensing these medals destined to record in your families
  the share you had in the ever memorable battle of Waterloo, it is
  a peculiar satisfaction to me that I can present them to those by
  whom they have been fairly and honourably earned, and that I can
  here solemnly declare that in the course of that eventful day I
  did not observe a soldier of this good regiment whose conduct was
  not only creditable to the English nation, but such as his dearest
  friends could desire.

  “Under such agreeable reflections, I request you to accept
  these medals, and to wear them with becoming pride, as they are
  incontestable proofs of a faithful discharge of your duty to your
  King and your country. I trust that they will act as powerful
  talismans to keep you in your future lives in the paths of honour,
  sobriety, and virtue.”

At the conclusion of the above address the arms were presented,
“God save the King” was played, and the battalion, by signal, gave
three cheers. Colonel Reynell then, from the lists of companies in
succession, called over the names of those entitled to receive a
medal, and with his own hand placed it in that of the soldier.

[Sidenote: 1817.]

New colours were presented to the regiment on the 18th of January,
1817, by Major-General Sir Denis Pack, K.C.B., who made the following
address on the occasion:—

  “Seventy-first Regiment!

  “Officers, non-commissioned officers, and soldiers, it affords
  me the greatest satisfaction, at the request of your commanding
  officer, Colonel Reynell, to have the honour of presenting these
  colours to you.

  “There are many who could perform the office with a better grace,
  but there is no one, believe me, who is more sensible of the merit
  of the corps, or who is more anxious for its honour and welfare.

  “I might justly pay to the valour and good conduct of those present
  the compliments usual on such occasions, but I had rather offer the
  expression of my regard and admiration of that excellent _esprit
  de corps_ and real worth which a ten years’ intimate knowledge of
  the regiment has taught me so highly to appreciate. I shall always
  look back with pleasure to that long period in which I had the good
  fortune to be your commanding officer, and during which time I
  received from the officers the most cordial and zealous assistance
  in support of discipline: from the non-commissioned officers proofs
  of the most disinterested regard for His Majesty’s service and
  the welfare of their regiment, and I witnessed on the part of the
  privates and the corps at large a fidelity to their colours in
  South America, as remarkable under such trying circumstances as
  their valour has at all times been conspicuous in the field. I am
  most happy to think that there is no drawback to the pleasure all
  should feel on this occasion. Your former colours were mislaid
  after a fête given in London to celebrate the Duke of Wellington’s
  return after his glorious termination of the Peninsula war, and
  your colonel, General Francis Dundas, has sent you three very
  handsome ones to replace them.

  “On them are emblazoned some of His Grace’s victories, in which the
  Seventy-first bore a most distinguished part, and more might be
  enumerated which the corps may well be proud of. There are still in
  your ranks valuable officers who have witnessed the early glories
  of the regiment in the East, and its splendid career since is fresh
  in the memory of all. Never, indeed, did the character of the
  corps stand higher; never was the fame of the British arms or the
  glory of the British empire more prominent than at this moment, an
  enthusiastic recollection of which the sight of these colours must
  always inspire.

  “While you have your present commanding officer to lead you, it is
  unnecessary for me to add anything to excite such a spirit; but was
  I called upon to do so, I should have only to hold up the example
  of those who have fallen in your ranks, and, above all, point to
  the memory of that hero who so gloriously fell at your head.”

The following appears from the Regimental Records to be a correct
list of the nationalities of the recruits raised for the regiment
between 1804 and 1815:—Scotchmen, 2,560; Irishmen, 1,087; Englishmen,
248; foreigners, 20: total, 3,915. The following is the list of
casualties sustained by the regiment between 1808 and 1815.

This list is very inaccurate, as no notice is taken in the Records
of the number of men that were killed in skirmishes, which probably
was very considerable. At Corunna it is stated that several men were
killed and wounded, but the actual number is not given. The number of
wounded at Walcheren is not given:—

              Key: Sgnts. = Sergeants.    Prvs. = Privates.

   Total  |                 |        Killed.     |     Wounded.
   Killed |                 +----+----+----+-----+----+----+----+----
    and   |                 |    |Sgnts.   |Prvs.|    |Sgnts.   |Prvs.
  Wounded.|   Action.       |Officers.|Buglers.  |Officers.|Buglers.
  --------+-----------------+----+----+----+-----+---------+----+----
      3   | Roleia          | .. | .. | .. |   1 | .. | .. | .. |   2
    112   | Vimiera         | .. | .. | .. |  12 |  8 |  6 | .. |  86
      1   | Corunna         | .. | .. | .. |  .. |  1 | .. | .. |  ..
     22   | Walcheren       |  2 | .. | .. |  19 |  1 | .. | .. |  ..
     42   | Sobral          | .. | .. | .. |   8 | .. | .. | .. |  34
    147   | Fuentes d’Onor  |  4 |  4 | .. |  22 |  8 |  6 |  3 | 100
     43   | Almaraz         |  1 |  1 | .. |   7 |  2 |  3 | .. |  29
     13   | Alba de Tormes  | .. |  1 | .. |   6 | .. |  1 | .. |   5
    370   | Vittoria        |  4 |  6 |  1 |  78 | 11 | 13 |  2 | 255
    140   | Maya            | .. |  3 | .. |  54 | .. |  6 |  1 |  76
     61   | Eguaros         |  1 |  1 | .. |  23 | .. |  2 |  1 |  33
     85   | Doña Maria      | .. |  1 | .. |  29 |  8 |  2 | .. |  45
     48   | Cambo           | .. | .. | .. |   2 | .. |  4 |  1 |  41
     70   | Nive            |  3 |  2 |  1 |  23 |  4 | .. | .. |  37
     39   | Orthes          |  1 | .. | .. |  17 |  1 |  1 | .. |  19
      1   | Tarbes          | .. | .. | .. |  .. |  1 | .. | .. |  ..
     10   | Toulouse        | .. |  1 | .. |   3 | .. | .. | .. |   6
          |{Waterloo       }|    |    |    |     |    |    |    |
    212   |{ (killed and   }|  3 |  3 | .. |  62 | 14 |  7 |  3 | 120
          |{died of wounds)}|    |    |    |     |    |    |    |
  --------+-----------------+----+----+----+-----+----+----+----+----
  1,419   |                 | 19 | 23 |  2 | 366 | 59 | 51 | 11 | 888
  --------+-----------------+----+----+----+-----+----+----+----+----

Two officers were taken prisoners at Fuentes d’Onor, and several
privates at Orthes. Three men were missing at Waterloo.

[Sidenote: 1818.]

The regiment formed part of the “army of occupation” in France until
towards the end of October, 1818, when it embarked at Calais for
England, and arrived at Dover on the 29th of that month.

After landing the regiment proceeded immediately to Chelmsford, where
it remained for a short time. During its stay at this place the
establishment was reduced from 810 to 650 rank and file.

On the 25th of November the regiment marched to Weedon, Derby, and
Nottingham, having its head-quarters at the former place.

[Sidenote: 1819.]

The regiment was inspected at Weedon on the 1st of May, 1819, by
Major-General Sir John Byng, who reported most favourably to His
Royal Highness the Commander-in-Chief upon its appearance and
discipline. In consequence of this report His Royal Highness was
pleased to dispense with any further inspection of the regiment
during the year.

Whilst stationed at Weedon, Colonel Reynell presented Sergeant
Angus Mackay, Pipe Major, with a highland purse of white goat-skin
handsomely mounted with silver, with the following inscription richly
engraved on a shield:—

  “From Col. Reynell to Acting-Sergeant Angus Mackay, Piper in the
  Seventy-first H.L.I., in testimony of approbation of his uniform
  good conduct.”

On the 21st of June, 1819, the regiment marched to Chester, having
detachments at Liverpool and the Isle of Man. On August 12th, Colonel
Thomas Reynell was appointed Major-General by brevet.

[Sidenote: 1820.]

In June, 1820, the regiment marched to Rochdale, Blackburn, and
Burnley. In July following it proceeded to Hertford, Ware, Hoddesdon,
and Hatfield; and on the 20th of November it was removed to
Canterbury.

Previously to the departure of the regiment from Hertford, it was
inspected by the Adjutant-General to the Forces, Major-General
Sir Henry Torrens, K.C.B., who communicated to Colonel Sir Thomas
Arbuthnot, K.C.B., commanding the Seventy-first, the expression
of the satisfaction experienced by His Royal Highness the
Commander-in-Chief in perusing the report made on that occasion.

[Sidenote: 1821.]

In June, 1821, the regiment marched to Chatham, having detachments at
Sheerness, Tilbury Fort, and Harwich. Here a further reduction took
place of 2 companies, making the establishment to consist of 576 rank
and file.

[Sidenote: 1822.]

From Chatham the regiment marched to London, and proceeded by the
canal to Liverpool, there to embark for Dublin, where it arrived on
the 3rd of May, 1822. The regiment remained in that city until the
beginning of October, when it marched to the south of Ireland. The
head-quarters were stationed at Fermoy, and detachments proceeded to
the villages of Ballyhooly, Castletown Roche, Kilworth, Kildorrery,
Wattstown, Glanworth, and Mitchelstown. A subaltern’s party was also
encamped at Glennasheen, in the county of Limerick, the disturbed
state of that part of Ireland requiring detachments in the above
posts, and the utmost exertions of every individual for their
protection.

[Sidenote: 1824.]

Lieut.-General Sir Gordon Drummond, G.C.B., was removed from the
colonelcy of the Eighty-eighth to that of the Seventy-first Regiment,
on the 16th of January, 1824, in succession to General Francis
Dundas, deceased.

The regiment remained here for two winters, and in the beginning of
May, 1824, orders were received to march to the Cove of Cork, to
embark for foreign service.

Before the Seventy-first marched to the coast for embarkation, very
gratifying addresses were presented to Colonel Sir Thomas Arbuthnot,
commanding the regiment, from the magistrates and inhabitants of the
district round Fermoy, conveying their approbation of the conduct of
the corps, which had won the esteem of all classes.

A very gratifying order was also issued by Major-General Sir John
Lambert, K.C.B., commanding the south-western district of Ireland,
relative to the conduct of the regiment. The regiment embarked
for North America on the 14th, 16th, 17th, and 18th of May, 1824,
on board the Indian trader “Prince of Orange,” “Cato” and “Fanny”
transports, and anchored at Quebec, on the 23rd, 24th, and 25th of
June.

[Sidenote: 1825.]

In the year 1825, the establishment of the regiment was augmented
from 8 to 10 companies, and formed into 6 _service_ and 4 _depôt_
companies, consisting of 42 sergeants, 14 buglers, and 740 rank and
file.

In consequence of this arrangement, the officers and non-commissioned
officers of 2 companies were sent to England, to join the depôt
companies at Chichester.

[Sidenote: 1826.]

The detachments stationed during the summer months at the posts of
Sorel and Three Rivers, rejoined the head-quarters of the regiment at
Quebec, on the 15th of October.

On the 25th of October and the 4th of November the service companies
were inspected by Lieut.-General the Earl of Dalhousie, the Commander
of the Forces in British North America, who expressed his fullest
approbation of their discipline and interior economy, as well as of
their conduct and appearance.

[Sidenote: 1827.]

The head-quarter division of the Seventy-first embarked at
Quebec for Montreal, on the 17th of May, 1827, after having been
stationed in that garrison nearly three years. Preparatory to this
change of quarters, the service companies were again inspected
by Lieut.-General the Earl of Dalhousie, who, in orders, assured
Lieut.-Colonel Jones that he had never seen any regiment in more
perfect order.

The service companies arrived at Montreal on the 19th of May, and
detachments from them were stationed at Isle-aux-Noix, St. John’s,
William Henry, La Chine, Coteau-du-Lac, and Rideau.

[Sidenote: 1828.]

On the 8th of May, 1828, the Seventy-first embarked for Kingston in
batteaux, and arrived there on the 16th of that month. It remained
stationed here for 12 months. During the summer and part of the
autumn it suffered much from fever and ague, having had at one period
nearly a third of the men in hospital.

[Sidenote: 1829.]

Upon the 1st of June, 1829, the head-quarters embarked in a steamboat
for York, now called Toronto, the capital of the Upper Province, and
arrived there on the following morning. One company was detached to
Niagara, another to Amherstburg, and a third to Penetanguishene, on
Lake Huron. A small number of men occupied the naval post at Grand
River, on Lake Erie. The Seventy-first occupied these posts for a
period of two years.

On the 10th of August, 1829, the depôt companies embarked at
Gravesend, for Berwick-on-Tweed.

Major-General Sir Colin Halkett, K.C.B., was removed from the
colonelcy of the Ninety-fifth to that of the Seventy-first Regiment,
on the 21st of September, 1829, in succession to General Sir Gordon
Drummond, G.C.B., who was appointed to the Forty-ninth Regiment.

[Sidenote: 1830.]

In June, 1830, the depôt companies were removed from Berwick-on-Tweed
to Edinburgh Castle.

[Sidenote: 1831.]

In May, 1831, the service companies moved down to Quebec, where the
whole were assembled on the 16th of June. After a stay of nearly five
months in that city, orders arrived for them to proceed to Bermuda.
They embarked on the 20th of October, 1831, in the transports
“Layton” and “Manlins,” arriving off St. George’s, Bermuda, upon
the 11th of November, when they immediately disembarked, sending a
detachment of 1 captain, 2 subalterns, and 120 men to Ireland Island.

The head-quarters were subsequently moved to Hamilton, and small
parties were detached to the signal posts at Gibbs Hill and Mount
Langton.

[Sidenote: 1833.]

During the years 1832 and 1833, the service companies continued
at Bermuda, and the depôt remained in North Britain. On the 30th
of August, 1833, Lieut.-Colonel the Honourable Charles Grey
exchanged from the half-pay to the Seventy-first Highlanders with
Lieut.-Colonel Joseph Thomas Pidgeon.

[Sidenote: 1834.]

[Sidenote: 1836.]

On the 11th of September, 1834, the service companies embarked
at Bermuda for Great Britain, and arrived at Leith on the 19th
of October following. The regiment was afterwards stationed at
Edinburgh, where it remained during the year 1835. It embarked at
Glasgow, on the 11th of May, 1836, for Ireland, and was stationed at
Dublin during the remainder of the year. New colours were presented
to the regiment while at this station, by the colonel of the
regiment, Lieut.-General Sir Colin Halkett, K.C.B., K.C.H., assisted
by the Honourable Mrs. Grey, wife of the colonel commanding the
regiment.

[Sidenote: 1837.]

In June, 1837, the regiment proceeded from Dublin to Kilkenny.

[Sidenote: 1838.]

Major-General Sir Samuel Ford Whittingham, K.C.B., was appointed
Colonel of the Seventy-first Highlanders, on the 28th of March, 1838,
in succession to Lieut.-General Sir Colin Halkett, K.C.B., appointed
to the Thirty-first Regiment.

Meanwhile orders had been received for the regiment to proceed on
foreign service, and on the 20th of April, 1838, the 6 service
companies embarked at Cork, for Canada. The 4 depôt companies
remained in Ireland.

[Sidenote: 1839.]

On the 2nd of June, 1839, the depôt companies embarked at Cork, for
North Britain, and were afterwards stationed at Stirling.

The establishment of the regiment was augmented on the 12th of
August, 1839, from 740 to 800 rank and file.

[Sidenote: 1840.]

During the year 1840 the service companies were stationed at St.
John’s, Lower Canada. The depôt companies proceeded from Stirling to
Dundee, in April.

[Sidenote: 1841.]

Lieut.-General Sir Thomas Reynell, Bart., K.C.B., was removed from
the colonelcy of the Eighty-seventh Royal Irish Fusiliers to that
of the Seventy-first, on the 15th of March, 1841, in succession
to Lieut.-General Sir Samuel Ford Whittingham, K.C.B. and K.C.H.,
deceased.

In May, 1841, the depôt companies proceeded from Dundee to Aberdeen.

Lieut.-Colonel the Honourable Charles Grey exchanged to half-pay with
Lieut.-Colonel James England, on the 8th of April, 1842.

[Sidenote: 1842.]

The service companies proceeded from St. John’s to Montreal in two
divisions, on the 27th and 28th of April, 1842.

In consequence of the augmentation which took place in the army at
this period, the Seventy-first Highland Light Infantry was ordered
to be divided into two battalions, the six service companies
being termed the first battalion, and the depôt, augmented by two
new companies, being styled the reserve battalion. The depôt was
accordingly moved from Stirling to Chichester, and after receiving
about 350 volunteers from other corps, was there organised into
a battalion for foreign service. Nearly all these volunteers
were English and Irish, who were allowed to join the regiment
notwithstanding the protestations of the commanding officer, who
requested that none but Scotchmen should be allowed to volunteer. The
nationality of the regiment was thereby unnecessarily destroyed for
many years.

The reserve battalion of the Seventy-first, under the command
of Lieut.-Colonel James England, embarked at Portsmouth in Her
Majesty’s troop ship “Resistance,” which sailed for Canada on the
13th of August, 1842, and the battalion landed at Montreal on the
23rd of September, where the first battalion was likewise stationed,
under the command of Major William Denny, who, upon the arrival of
Lieut.-Colonel England, took charge of the reserve battalion.

[Sidenote: 1843.]

The reserve battalion marched from Montreal to Chambly on the 5th of
May, 1843, and arrived there on the same day.

The first battalion, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel England,
embarked at Quebec for the West Indies in the “Java” transport, on
the 20th of October, 1843. The head-quarters disembarked at Grenada
on the 15th of December following.

It is a circumstance worthy of record that all the men of the first
battalion who were married without leave were replaced by volunteers
from the reserve battalion, thereby preventing the separation
and consequent misery of those families, and that all permanent
volunteers for Canada, and old soldiers who were permitted from
general good character to remain in the colony after discharge, or
who were found unfit for service in a tropical climate, were replaced
by volunteers from the reserve battalion.

[Sidenote: 1844.]

The head-quarters of the first battalion embarked on the 25th of
December, 1844, at Grenada, for Antigua. Lieut. Francis P. Stewart
Mackenzie died of yellow fever at Grenada, on the 21st of December,
much regretted by his brother officers.

[Sidenote: 1845.]

During the year 1845 the head-quarters of the first battalion
continued at Antigua.

The head-quarters and three companies of the reserve battalion
marched from Chambly on the 11th of May, 1845, and arrived at
Kingston, in Canada, on the 14th of that month.

[Sidenote: 1846.]

On the 18th of April, 1846, the head-quarters and four companies
of the first battalion embarked at Antigua, on board the transport
“Princess Royal,” and landed at Barbadoes on the 24th of the same
month.

The first battalion, under the command of Captain Nathaniel Massey
Stack, embarked for England at Barbadoes on the 29th and 31st of
December, on board of Her Majesty’s ship “Belleisle.” During this
tour of service in the West Indies, which lasted just three years,
1 officer, 8 sergeants, and 124 rank and file died of fever and
dysentery.

On the 6th of October, 1846, the reserve battalion left Kingston, in
Canada West, and the head-quarters arrived at La Prairie on the 8th
of that month.

[Sidenote: 1847.]

The ship “Belleisle,” having the first battalion on board, sailed
for Portsmouth on the 1st of January, 1847, and arrived at Spithead
on the 25th of that month. After disembarking at Portsmouth, the
battalion proceeded to Winchester, where it was stationed until the
19th of July, when it was conveyed in three divisions by railway to
Glasgow, and on the 21st of December it was removed to Edinburgh.

In September, 1847, the head-quarters of the reserve battalion were
removed from La Prairie to Chambly, and in October proceeded to St.
John’s, in Canada East.

[Sidenote: 1848.]

Lieutenant-General Sir Thomas Arbuthnot, K.C.B., was removed from the
colonelcy of the Ninth Foot to that of the Seventy-first Highlanders
on the 18th of February, 1848, in succession to Lieut.-General Sir
Thomas Reynell, Bart. and K.C.B., deceased.

Three companies of the first battalion proceeded from Edinburgh to
Dublin on the 27th of April, 1848, and the head-quarters, with the
three remaining companies, were removed to Dublin on the 1st of May.
In June the head-quarters were removed to Naas.

During the year 1848, the head-quarters of the reserve battalion
remained at St. John’s, in Canada East.

[Sidenote: 1849.]

Lieut.-General Sir James Macdonell, K.C.B. and K.C.H., was appointed
from the Seventy-ninth to be Colonel of the Seventy-first on the 8th
of February, 1849, upon the decease of Lieut.-General Sir Thomas
Arbuthnot, K.C.B.

In compliance with instructions received upon the occasion of Her
Majesty’s visit to Dublin, the head-quarters of the first battalion,
with the effectives of three companies, proceeded from Naas to that
garrison on the 28th of July, and were encamped in the Phœnix Park.
The three detached companies also joined at the encampment on the
same day. On the 13th of August the head-quarters and three companies
returned to Naas.

The head-quarters and two companies of the reserve battalion, under
the command of Lieut.-Colonel Sir Hew Dalrymple, Bart., proceeded
from St. John’s to Montreal, in aid of the civil power, on the
28th of April, 1849. The head-quarters and three companies quitted
Montreal, and encamped on the island of St. Helen’s on the 30th of
June, but returned to St. John’s on the 16th of July. On the 17th of
August, 1849, the head-quarters and two companies proceeded from St.
John’s to Montreal in aid of the civil power, and returned to St.
John’s on the 6th of September.

[Sidenote: 1850.]

In April, 1850, the first battalion proceeded from Naas to Dublin.

The head-quarters and two companies of the reserve battalion quitted
St. John’s and Chambly on the 21st of May, 1850, and arrived at
Toronto on the 23rd of that month, where the battalion was joined by
the other companies, and it continued there during the remainder of
the year.

[Sidenote: 1851.]

In April, 1851, the first battalion proceeded from Dublin to
Mullingar, and in July following was removed to Newry, under the
command of Lieut.-Colonel William Denny.

During the year 1851, the reserve battalion continued to be stationed
at Toronto.

[Sidenote: 1852.]

In May, 1852, the reserve battalion proceeded from Toronto to
Kingston. On the 8th of June following, Lieut.-Colonel Sir Hew
Dalrymple, Bart., retired from the service by the sale of his
commission, and was succeeded by Lieut.-Colonel Nathaniel Massey
Stack.

In August the first battalion moved to Kilkenny, sending detachments
to New Ross and Wexford.

On the 1st of November orders were received from the Horse Guards by
the first battalion to hold itself in readiness for embarkation for
the Mediterranean.

[Sidenote: 1853.]

On the 3rd of January it received new colours, shortly after which it
moved to Cork. Soon after the arrival of the first battalion at Cork,
the old colours were placed over a tablet erected at Kinsale to the
memory of the late Lieut.-General Sir Thomas Arbuthnot, a native of
that place, who commanded the regiment for many years.

During the months of February and March the first battalion embarked
in three freight ships for Corfu. By a War Office Letter of 20th
February, 1854, the first battalion was augmented from the 1st April
by 1 pipe major and 5 pipers. In May, 1853, the reserve battalion
proceeded to Quebec, and was quartered in the Citadel. After the
embarkation of the first battalion, the depôt proceeded to Chatham.

[Sidenote: 1854.]

The reserve battalion embarked at Quebec on the 20th September,
landed in England on the 13th of October, and proceeded to
Canterbury, where it was shortly afterwards joined by the depôt from
Chatham. On its departure from Canada, 100 men volunteered to the
Sixteenth and Canadian Rifles. On the 1st of January of this year the
following was the composition of the first and reserve battalion.
The depôt is not included:—

                       1st battalion   Reserve battalion   Total
  --------------------+--------------+--------------------+------
  Scotch.             |    540       |       470          | 1,010
  English.            |     21       |        38          |    59
  Irish.              |     34       |        26          |    60
  --------------------+--------------+--------------------+------
    Total.            |    595       |       534          | 1,129
  --------------------+--------------+--------------------+------
  Presbyterians.      |    517       |       467          |   984
  Church of England.  |     37       |        34          |    71
  Church of Rome.     |     41       |        33          |    74
  --------------------+--------------+--------------------+------

The English and Irish were all, with the exception of boys from
the Military Colleges, the remains of the volunteers who joined
the reserve battalion in 1842. On the 24th of November, all the
effectives of the reserve battalion, consisting of 1 major, 3
captains, 6 subalterns, 1 assistant surgeon, 20 sergeants, 6
buglers, and 391 rank and file, embarked at Portsmouth on board
the line-of-battle ship “Royal Albert,” for the Crimea, and landed
at Balaclava on the 20th of December, where it was kept, sending
frequent working parties to the front. The reserve battalion thus had
six weeks’ home service after being twelve years abroad.

[Sidenote: 1855.]

The first battalion embarked at Corfu for the Crimea on board
the transport “Medway” on the 26th January, 1855, and landed at
Balaclava on the 7th of February. On the 13th the first and reserve
battalions were amalgamated into one battalion of eight companies,
about 900 strong, of all ranks. It remained at Balaclava till the
3rd of May, when it embarked on board the “Furious” and “Gladiator”
steam frigates, forming part of the first expedition to Kertch,
which, however, was recalled without accomplishing its object. The
regiment was disembarked on the 8th of May, and marched to the front,
joining the third brigade of the fourth division, and serving in
the trenches. It was re-embarked on board the frigates “Sidon” and
“Valorous” on the 22nd of May, and proceeded to Kertch with the
expeditionary force of the Allied army. The whole landed at Kamish
Burnu (about five miles from Kertch), under cover of the gunboats,
bivouacked that night, and proceeded the next day, marching through
Kertch to Yenikale, where it encamped. The regiment re-embarked at
Yenikale on the 10th of June, on board the steam frigates “Sidon” and
“Valorous,” to return to Sebastopol, but was again disembarked on the
12th, the head-quarters and right wing remaining at Yenikale, and the
left wing proceeding to Cape St. Paul, to protect those points in
conjunction with a French and Turkish force.

In the beginning of August a draft of 120 men, under Captain
Rich, disembarked at Balaclava, and marched to the front. It was
attached to the Highland division, being occasionally employed in
the trenches. At the end of September it embarked for Yenikale,
and joined the head-quarters on the 2nd of October. On the 24th of
September three companies, under Major Hunter, crossed the Straits of
Yenikale, in conjunction with a French force, to Taman, where a large
quantity of hutting material and fuel was obtained. The expedition
returned to Kertch on the 3rd of October.

[Sidenote: 1856.]

The strength and composition of the regiment on the 1st of January
was as follows, exclusive of a depôt at Malta, which was about 100
strong:—

  -----------------+---------+----------+--------+--------
                   | Scotch. | English. | Irish. | Total.
                   +---------+----------+--------+--------
  Head-quarters    |   823   |   36     |   44   |   903
  Depôt at Perth   |   264   |   37     |   50   |   351
  -----------------+---------+----------+--------+--------
        Total      | 1,087   |   73     |   94   | 1,254
  -----------------+---------+----------+--------+--------

of which, Presbyterians 1,061, Church of England 77, Church of Rome
116.

The head-quarters and six companies, under Colonel Ready, remained in
Yenikale, having two companies on detachment, under Major Campbell,
at Kertch, till the 30th of May, when the head-quarters moved into
Kertch, which was handed over to the Russian authorities on the 22nd
of June. On the same day the head-quarters and six companies embarked
on board the steam ship “Pacific,” and two under Major Campbell, in
the steam ship “Edina,” and disembarked at Malta on the 29th of June.

The Highland brigade having been kept in reserve during the war, had
few casualties in proportion to other regiments. The Seventy-first
had only 2 men killed, 6 wounded, and 1 taken prisoner. Major K.
Hunter, Lieut. Northey, Assistant-Surgeon Gilborne, and about 100
non-commissioned officers and men died of sickness. The regiment
whilst stationed at Malta occupied the Floriana, Ricasoli, and
Verdala Barracks.

[Sidenote: 1857.]

On the 1st of January, 1857, the following was the strength and
composition of the regiment:—

  -----------------+----------+--------+---------+--------
    Nationality.   | English. | Irish. | Scotch. | Total.
  -----------------+----------+--------+---------+--------
   Head-quarters   |   32     |   47   |   795   |   874
   Depôt at Perth  |   25     |   37   |   290   |   352
  -----------------+----------+--------+---------+--------
         Total     |   57     |   84   | 1,085   | 1,226
  -----------------+----------+--------+---------+--------

of which, 1,043 Presbyterians, 67 Church of England, and 116 Church
of Rome.

On the 26th of November, a draft of 2 officers and 41 men joined the
head-quarters from the depôt.

[Sidenote: 1858.]

On the evening of the 2nd of January, 1858, the regiment received
orders by telegram to proceed overland to India. The head-quarters
and six companies, under Lieut.-Colonel Campbell, embarked on board
the line-of-battle ship “Princess Royal,” on the 4th, 36 hours
later, and disembarked at Alexandria on the 18th. Two companies,
under Major Hope, which proceeded in Her Majesty’s ship “Vulture,”
disembarked there a few days previously. The regiment then proceeded
in two divisions, by railway, to a place half way between Cairo and
Suez, where they were mounted on donkeys, and proceeded to Suez,
a distance of about 20 or 25 miles. Owing to the smallness of the
donkeys, and the size of many of the men, most of them preferred
marching to riding. The head-quarters and right wing, under command
of Lieut.-Colonel Campbell, arrived at Bombay on the 6th of February,
and proceeded to Mhow by bullock train in several detachments, the
last of which arrived on the 17th of March. The whole marched from
Mhow on the 30th of March, to join the Central India Field Force,
under Major-General Sir Hugh Rose, K.C.B. They joined the second
brigade at Moti on the 3rd of May, were present at the action of
Koonch on the 7th of May, the actions at Muttra and Deapoora on
the 16th and 17th of May, action at Golowlee on the 22nd of May,
occupation of Calpee on the 23rd of May. This wing was also present
at the action of Morar on the 16th of June, on which occasion Lieut.
Wyndham Neave, 1 sergeant, 1 corporal, and 2 privates were killed and
8 privates wounded. Private George Rodgers was granted the Victoria
Cross for distinguished conduct and courage on this occasion.
Lieut.-Colonel Campbell, Major Rich, and Lieut. Scott were especially
mentioned.

On the 19th and 20th the whole force, in conjunction with Brigadier
Smith’s column, took possession of Gwalior. Great sufferings from the
excessive heat were undergone by the Central India Force, all the
actions having taken place in the two hottest months of an Indian
summer. To avoid the excessive power of the sun, the marches were
always, when practicable, conducted at night, but owing to the heat
and the plague of flies, but little rest could be got in the daytime,
the thermometer in the tents generally standing at 120°. About 50 men
of the regiment died of sunstroke on the march, and many died soon
after arrival at Morar from utter exhaustion and weakness.

[Sidenote: 1859.]

After the capture of Gwalior the regiment returned to Morar, where it
was stationed till the 12th of August, when it returned to Gwalior,
and was stationed at the Lashkar and Phaol Bagh, and returned again
to Morar on the 6th of June, 1859. On the 11th of November a small
field force, under Lieut.-Colonel Rich, Seventy-first, including a
detachment of the Seventy-first, went out into the jungle to look for
the rebel forces, and defeated them at Ranode and at Nainwass, on
which last occasion 3 privates were killed. This detachment returned
to Gwalior on the 27th of May, 1859.

The left wing, which had arrived at Bombay on the 8th of February,
started on the 11th of March for Mhow, and arrived there on the 17th
of April. On the 9th of June a company was sent to Indore. On the
2nd of September the whole of the detachment in Mhow marched with a
field force under command of Major-General Michel, C.B., in pursuit
of the rebels, under their celebrated leader Tantia Topee. It was
present at the actions at Rajghur, 15th of September, Mongrowlee, 9th
of October (on which occasion 1 private was killed), Sindwaho, 19th
of October, and Koorai, 25th of October, and afterwards marched to
Goonah, where it arrived on the 17th January, 1859. On the 25th of
November a party of 50 men, mounted on camels, left Mhow with a small
column, under command of Major Sutherland, Ninety-second Highlanders,
and was engaged with the rebels at Rajpore on the 25th November, when
the latter were defeated, after which they returned to Mhow.

On the 1st of January, 1859, the company which had been stationed
at Indore marched to join a column under Brigadier-General Sir
Robert Napier, K.C.B., and was present at the attack on the fort of
Nahargurh on the 17th of January, on which occasion 2 privates were
severely wounded. Captain F. W. Lambton, in command of the company,
was specially mentioned for his daring attack, for which service he
was subsequently granted a brevet-majority. Two companies joined
head-quarters from Goonah, in June, leaving a detachment of three
companies there.

The head-quarters were inspected on the 2nd of December, 1859, by the
Commander-in-Chief, Lord Clyde. His Excellency was pleased to express
his satisfaction, both at what he himself saw, and at the reports
which he had received regarding the state of the regiment from other
sources. The report of His Excellency to His Royal Highness the
General Commanding-in-Chief produced the following letter from the
Adjutant-General of the Forces.

                                             “_Horse Guards,_
                                                “_24th January, 1860._

  “SIR,

  “His Royal Highness the General Commanding-in-Chief is much
  gratified to hear from General Lord Clyde, Commander-in-Chief in
  India, that at his Lordship’s late visit to the station occupied by
  the regiment under your command, he found it in the highest order.
  After the recent arduous and continuous duties on which it has been
  employed, great credit is due to its Commanding Officer and to
  every rank in the corps, and His Royal Highness requests that his
  opinion may be communicated to them accordingly.

                               “I have the honour to be, Sir,
                                      “Your most obedient servant,
                             (Signed)      “G. A. WETHERALL, _General,
                                                   “Adjutant-General_.

  “_Colonel W. Hope,
      “Commanding Seventy-first Regiment._”


The three companies on detachment at Goonah rejoined head-quarters on
the 19th of December, and the regiment, after being broken up into
detachments for two years, was brought together again.

In the month of December Colonel R. D. Campbell died in London, and
the command of the regiment devolved on Colonel W. Hope, C.B.

[Sidenote: 1860.]

On the 22nd of July cholera broke out in the regiment, and in spite
of every sanitary measure being taken, did not finally disappear till
the 16th of September, during which time it carried off 1 colour
sergeant, 2 sergeants, 66 rank and file, 11 women, and 11 children.
It is worthy of remark that during this time only 1 officer was
slightly attacked.

On the 20th of December, the regiment having been relieved by the
Twenty-seventh Enniskillens, marched to Sealkote, in the Punjab. The
state of discipline of the regiment whilst at Gwalior can be gathered
from the following official reports:—

Extract from a Report from the Political Agent at Gwalior to the
Government of India, dated 15th June, 1859:—

  “When it was determined in June last to post a British force at the
  Laskar, the people expected with dread and deprecation a violent
  and dangerous, at the least a rude and overbearing, soldiery;
  but Her Majesty’s Seventy-first Highlanders soon falsified their
  expectations, and created new feelings. His Highness and the best
  informed men of the Durbar have assured me that those soldiers,
  who passed ten months in the Phoolbagh, have by their manners,
  habits, dealings, and whole demeanour so conciliated the respect
  and regard of all, that nothing could be more acceptable than the
  domestication of such a force in the capital. The Durbar further
  considers that it would bring to Gwalior incalculable industrial
  advantages, through affording a constant supply of superintendents
  of public works and skilled labour. I venture to express the hope
  that His Excellency may consider the Durbar’s view of the conduct
  of Her Majesty’s Seventy-first Highlanders, commanded by Colonel
  Campbell, C.B., a very high and true compliment, as worthy of
  express recognition as good conduct in the field. It is, in my
  humble judgment, a most fully deserved compliment.

                             (Signed)      “A. A. CHARTERS MACPHERSON,
                                                “_Political Agent_.”


                                          “_Camp, Agra,
                                                “29th November, 1859._

  “MY LORD,

  “As your Lordship is going to Gwalior, I trust you will not think
  that I exceed my office if I venture to send you an extract
  from a report of June last, in which I attract the attention of
  Government to the admirable conduct of Her Majesty’s Seventy-first
  Highlanders, and to its appreciation by Maharajah Scindia and
  his people. The importance of such conduct on the part of the
  first British troops stationed at the capital of Gwalior might
  scarcely be over-stated. Having lived with the Seventy-first at the
  Phoolbagh for about twelve months, my pride in them as soldiers and
  countrymen must be my excuse to your Lordship for venturing upon
  the irregular communications of my impressions.

  “General Napier’s views will, I trust, confirm them.

                             (Signed)     “A. A. CHARTERS MACPHERSON,
                                                  “_Political Agent_.”

Extract from remarks by His Royal Highness the General
Commanding-in-Chief, on the Confidential Reports for the year 1859:—

                                         “_Horse Guards,
                                                “10th November, 1860._

  “Brigadier-General Sir Robert Napier’s Report upon the
  Seventy-first Regiment is as satisfactory to His Royal Highness and
  as creditable to the corps as it is excellent in itself.

                         (Signed)      “H. D. TORRENS,
                                   “_Assistant Adjutant-General,
                                               “Her Majesty’s Forces_.

     “_Simla,
  “1st March, 1861._”

[Sidenote: 1861.]

The regiment marched into Sealkote on the 17th of February. The
following was the strength and composition of the regiment at this
time:—

  -----------------+----------+---------+---------+--------
    Nationality.   | English. | Scotch. | Irish. | Total.
  -----------------+----------+---------+--------+--------
   In India        |    29    |  659    |   43   |  731
   Depôt at Perth  |    36    |  177    |   41   |  254
  -----------------+----------+---------+--------+--------
        Total      |    65    |  836    |   84   |  985
  -----------------+----------+---------+--------+--------

of which 790 were Presbyterians, 67 Church of England, and 128 Roman
Catholics. A draft of 130 men on its way to India is not included.
The proportion of English and Irish in the regiment at this time was
less than in any other Highland regiment.

[Sidenote: 1862.]

The regiment remained stationed at Sealkote till the 1st of November,
1862, when, having been relieved by the Ninety-third Highlanders,
it marched to Nowshera, where it arrived on the 21st of November,
detaching one company to Attock.

[Sidenote: 1863.]

The regiment remained at Nowshera till the 14th of October, 1863,
when, in accordance with instructions received from head-quarters,
it marched to Nawakilla, in the Yusufzai country, leaving all sick
men and invalids behind at Nowshera. The force which was assembled
at Nawakilla for service in the hill country was under the command
of Brigadier-General Sir Neville Chamberlain, K.C.B. The object of
the expedition was to destroy Mulka, on the Mahaban Mountain, the
stronghold of certain Hindoostanee fanatics, generally known as the
“Sitana” fanatics, who infested our frontiers, and were incessantly
attacking the villages in our territory. Mulka is just beyond the
English frontier, and in the territory of the Indoons. The force
marched in two divisions; the first, entirely composed of native
troops, marched on the 18th; the second, composed of European troops,
marched on the 20th. The Umbeylah Pass was seized without difficulty,
but, owing to the bad road, the march, although a comparatively short
one, lasted nearly 24 hours, and several days passed before all the
guns and baggage were brought up. On the 21st the regiment encamped
near the village of Umbeylah. On the 26th of October, 150 men of
the Seventy-first, under Major Parker, were engaged in repelling
an attack from the enemy, on which occasion 1 private was killed
and 5 were wounded. Privates William Clapperton and George Stewart
were recommended for the medal for service in the field on this
occasion. On the 30th the enemy made another attack on the pickets,
but were repulsed. The Seventy-first had 3 privates wounded on this
occasion. On the 6th November a party of the regiment was attacked by
the enemy, having been sent too far to the front, and not properly
supported. Ensign C. B. Murray, Lieut. Dougal, Seventy-ninth,
attached, 1 sergeant, and 3 privates were killed, and 4 privates
were wounded. Captain Mounsey and Lieut. Davidson, the latter of
the Indian Army attached to the Seventy-first, were specially
mentioned for their gallantry on this occasion. On the 18th the
whole force changed position to higher ground, and was immediately
attacked by the enemy, who was not repulsed before night. On this
occasion Captain C. T. Smith, Lieut. Gore Jones, of the Seventy-ninth
Highlanders, doing duty with the Seventy-first, and 4 privates, were
killed, 1 sergeant and 4 privates were wounded. Major Parker was
specially mentioned for his services. On the 19th Captain Aldridge
and 1 private were killed; 1 private was wounded. On the 20th, the
enemy, having succeeded in driving out the 101st Fusiliers from the
“Crag Picket,” by a sudden and unexpected attack, the Seventy-first
were ordered up to retake it. The “Crag Picket” was situated at
the top of a very rocky hill, which rendered the operation doubly
difficult. Led by Colonel W. Hope, C.B., who was severely wounded,
and supported by two native corps, the Seventy-first, in spite of
the natural obstacles and the determined resistance of the enemy,
retook the “Crag Picket” at the point of the bayonet. The loss on
this occasion was 7 privates killed, 1 field officer, 2 sergeants.
3 corporals, and 19 privates wounded. On the 27th, 1 private was
killed. On the 15th of December Major-General Garvock, commanding the
Peshawur division, had succeeded Sir N. Chamberlain in the command of
the whole force, when the latter was wounded on the 20th of November.
Having received strong reinforcements, he attacked and defeated the
enemy on all points. The regiment, being on picket duty, was not
engaged on this occasion. Shortly after the Boneyrs asked for and
obtained terms of peace. The regiment returned to Nonshera on the
30th December.

The following was the loss sustained by the regiment in the Umbeylah
Pass. 5 officers (including Lieutenants Dougal and Jones of the
Seventy-ninth attached), 1 sergeant, and 17 privates killed; 1
officer, 4 sergeants, and 42 privates wounded.

[Sidenote: 1864.]

On the 4th of January the regiment marched for Peshawur, where it
arrived on the 5th. On the 21st of January it was inspected by His
Excellency Sir Hugh Rose, K.C.B., who expressed himself in the most
complimentary manner with reference to the conduct of the regiment
in the late campaign. The three men whose names had appeared in
General Orders, Privates William Malcolm, William Clapperton, and
George Stewart, were called to the front, and were addressed by His
Excellency in terms of approval of their gallant conduct in the
presence of the enemy. On the 23rd of October the regiment commenced
its march for Calcutta prior to embarkation for England. At Rawal
Pindee it was called upon to give volunteers for the other regiments
in the Bengal Presidency. 200 men volunteered, and were transferred
accordingly. At Umbala, on the 14th of December, at a general
parade of the garrison, medals for “gallant conduct in the field”
were presented by Major-General Lord George Paget, commanding the
Sirhind division, to Sergeant-Major John Blackwood, Privates William
Malcolm, William Macdonald, William Clapperton, and George Stewart.
Sergeant-Major J. Blackwood, who had been dangerously wounded, was
also granted an annuity of £15 a year, and was shortly afterwards
invalided on account of his wound. He has since been appointed one of
Her Majesty’s Yeomen of the Guard and Sergeant-Major of the Second
Royal Lanark Militia.

[Sidenote: 1865.]

On the 4th of February the head-quarters and right wing under Colonel
Hope, C.B., embarked at Calcutta; the left wing, under Major Gore,
embarked on the 14th of February.

The right wing arrived at Plymouth on the 29th of May, and shortly
afterwards proceeded to Edinburgh Castle, where it was joined by the
left wing, which disembarked at Gravesend on the 19th of June.

The following divisional and general orders were published before the
regiment left India:—

Extract of divisional order by Major-General Sir John Garvock,
K.C.B., Commanding Peshawur Division.

                                         “_Rawul Pindee,
                                                 “1st November, 1864._

  “The Seventy-first Highland Light Infantry being about to leave
  the Peshawur Division _en route_ for England, the Major-General
  desires to offer them his best wishes on the occasion. He has
  known the regiment for a number of years. He was very intimately
  associated with it in the Mediterranean, and his interest in it
  is now materially increased in no small degree by its having
  served under him in the field, and done its part, and done it
  well, in obtaining for him those honours which Her Majesty has
  been pleased to confer. The Major-General had not assumed command
  of the Yusufzai Field Force when the Seventy-first recaptured the
  ‘Crag Picket,’ but he well knows it was a most gallant exploit. Sir
  John Garvock, K.C.B., begs Colonel Hope, C.B., and the officers,
  non-commissioned officers, and soldiers of the Seventy-first Light
  Infantry to believe that although they will be soon no longer under
  his command, he will continue to take the liveliest interest in
  their career, and he now wishes them a speedy and prosperous voyage.

              (Signed)      “J. WRIGHT, _Lieut.-Colonel,
                                        “Assistant Adjutant-General_.”

General order by His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief.

                                “_Head-quarters, Calcutta,
                                                 “27th January, 1865._

  “The services of the Seventy-first Highland Light Infantry in
  India entitle them, on their departure to England, to honourable
  mention in general orders. A wing of the regiment, on their arrival
  in India in 1858, joined the Central India Field Force, and His
  Excellency is enabled to bear testimony to the good services which
  they performed, and the excellent spirit which they displayed
  during that campaign. The regiment more recently distinguished
  itself under their Commanding Officer, Colonel W. Hope, C.B., in
  the late operations on the frontier. Sir Hugh Rose cannot, in
  justice to military merit, speak of the Seventy-first in a general
  order without reverting to an earlier period, when in two great
  campaigns in Europe they won a reputation which has earned them an
  honourable page in history.

  “Sir Hugh Rose’s best wishes attend this distinguished regiment on
  their leaving his command for home.

  “By order of His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief.

                 (Signed)       “G. HAYTHORN, _Colonel,
                                                  “Adjutant-General._”

The losses of the regiment during the seven years it was quartered
in India were Captain W. F. Smith, Captain R. B. Aldridge, Lieut.
Wyndham Neave, and Ensign C. B. Murray, 2 sergeants and 24 rank and
file killed, 1 officer, Colonel W. Hope, C.B., 4 sergeants, and 50
rank and file wounded. Major H. Loftus, Lieut. and Adjutant Cowburn,
Ensign Swainson, and Surgeon W. Simpson, and about 250 men, died of
disease. About a half of the loss incurred by disease occurred during
the six weeks that the Central India campaign lasted, and during the
six weeks that the cholera was raging in the regiment in 1860.

The depôt companies joined the regiment in Edinburgh, and the
establishment of the regiment was fixed at 12 companies, with 54
sergeants, 31 buglers and pipers, and 700 rank and file.

In October occurred the death of Brevet Lieut.-Colonel Parker, of
typhoid fever, after a service of 23 years in the regiment.

[Sidenote: 1866.]

In February, authority was received from the Commander-in-Chief
for the officers of the regiment to wear a sword with a cross hilt
instead of a basket hilt on all occasions except at levees, &c.

In the same month the regiment embarked at Granton, for Aldershot,
where it arrived on the 19th, and remained stationed there till
December, when it proceeded to Portsmouth, and embarked on board Her
Majesty’s ship “Tamar” for Ireland, where it arrived on the 14th.
The head-quarters and five companies proceeded to Fermoy, detaching
three companies to Cork and two to Ballincollig. During the whole
of this year, when a Fenian outbreak was anticipated, the regiment
was much broken up into detachments, having at different times sent
detachments to the following places:—Cork, Ballincollig, Mallow,
Millstreet, Dungarvan, Mitchelstown, Tralee, Limerick, Killarney, and
Rathkeale. On the 27th of November Colonel W. Hope, C.B., retired
on half-pay, after a service of 32 years in the regiment, and after
having commanded it for eight years, much and deservedly respected
and regretted by all ranks. The command now devolved on Major J. J.
Macdonell.

[Sidenote: 1868.]

The regiment proceeded to Dublin on the 30th April, 1868, at which
time its establishment was increased to 800 privates. On the 22nd of
July the regiment proceeded to the Curragh Camp, and remained there
till the 17th of October, when it embarked on board Her Majesty’s
ship “Simoom” for Gibraltar, where it arrived on the 22nd of the same
month.

[Sidenote: 1869.]

On the 1st of April the establishment of the regiment was reduced by
100 privates.

[Sidenote: 1870.]

On the 31st of March the regiment sustained the loss by death of
Lieut.-General the Honourable C. Grey, the Colonel of the regiment.
General Grey had previously commanded the regiment from 1833 to 1842,
and had always taken the greatest interest in its welfare. He was
succeeded by Lieut.-General R. Law, K.H., who in the earlier part of
his military career had served in the Seventy-first during the whole
of the war in Spain, having been present with the regiment at all
the actions in which it was engaged, and having been wounded several
times. He was also severely wounded by a cannon ball at the battle
of Waterloo, whilst performing the duties of adjutant. On the 1st of
April the establishment of the regiment was reduced from 12 to 10
companies.

According to a return furnished to the Horse Guards in 1872, the
Seventy-first proved to be the most national one among the Highland
corps, the numbers being 710 Scotch, 25 English, and 18 Irish.

[Sidenote: 1873.]

By general order dated 17th March, 1873, the regiment was associated
with the Seventy-eighth Highlanders (Ross-shire Buffs), and formed
into the Fifty-fifth Brigade, together with the Ross, Caithness, &c.,
and Inverness, Nairn, and Elgin militia regiments, with its depôt
established permanently at Fort George.

[Sidenote: 1874.]

On the 24th of April the service companies embarked on board Her
Majesty’s ship “Tamar,” for passage to Malta, where they disembarked
on the 30th of the same month.

On the 10th of May the death of Lieut.-General Law took place. He
was succeeded in the command of the regiment by Lieut.-General the
Honourable G. Cadogan, who was transferred from the 106th at his own
request. General Cadogan is nephew of Lieut.-Colonel the Honourable
H. Cadogan, who commanded the regiment throughout the whole of the
Peninsular war, and was finally killed at the battle of Vittoria.

[Sidenote: 1876.]

The regiment still remains quartered at Malta. The composition and
nationality of the regiment at the present date is as follows:—

  -------------------------------+----------+--------+---------+-------
        Mode of Enlistment.      | English. | Irish. | Scotch. | Total.
  -------------------------------+----------+--------+---------+-------
  Enlisted for Seventy-first     |    12    |    6   |   526   |  544
  -------------------------------+----------+--------+---------+-------
  Transfers from other regiments |     7    |    3   |    --   |   10
  -------------------------------+----------+--------+---------+-------
  From schools                   |     7    |   --   |    --   |    7
  -------------------------------+----------+--------+---------+-------
  Fifty-fifth Brigade            |    34    |   25   |    --   |   59
  -------------------------------+----------+--------+---------+-------
  Total                          |    60    |   34   |   526   |  620
  -------------------------------+----------+--------+---------+-------

It will be seen by the above how little the Seventy-first has
profited by the Depôt Brigade system.


HARRISON AND SONS, PRINTERS IN ORDINARY TO HER MAJESTY, ST. MARTIN’S
LANE.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Journal of a French officer.

[2] Major in the Seventy-third, Lieut.-Colonel by “local” rank, dated
23rd May, 1781.

[3] The effective return of the regiment at this time was 29
officers, 934 sergeants, rank and file.

[4] On the 23rd of May, 1821, His Majesty King George IV was
graciously pleased to authorise the Seventy-first to bear on the
regimental colours and appointments the word “Hindoostan” in
commemoration of its distinguished services in the several actions in
which it had been engaged, while in India, between the years 1780 and
1797.

[5] The royal authority was subsequently granted for the
Seventy-first to bear the words “Cape of Good Hope” on the regimental
colours and appointments, to commemorate its distinguished gallantry
at the capture of that colony.

[6] The absurdly contradictory name of Glasgow Highland Light
Infantry has not been in use for many years.

[7] The correct number of rank and file wounded is not given.




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Some hyphens in words have been silently removed, some added,
  when a predominant preference was found in the original book.

  Variant spellings of McLeod and MacKenzie, and some other Scottish
  names, have been left unchanged.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained.

  Pg 8: ‘ohn Mackenzie’ replaced by ‘John Mackenzie’.
  Pg 69: ‘bear the the word’ replaced by ‘bear the word’.
  Pg 106: ‘being commited’ replaced by ‘being committed’.
  Pg 130: ‘Enniskeillens,’ replaced by ‘Enniskillens,’.
  Pg 134: ‘Garvoch, commanding’ replaced by ‘Garvock, commanding’.
  Pg 138: ‘for Aldershott’ replaced by ‘for Aldershot’.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORICAL RECORD OF THE 71ST
REGIMENT HIGHLAND LIGHT INFANTRY ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
